# Chapter 1. Discovering Blockchain Technologies

## Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)
We are witnessing the transition from centralized computing, storage, and processing to decentralized architectures and systems. According to [Muneeb Ali](https://medium.com/@muneeb/the-next-wave-of-computing-743295b4bc73), these systems aim to
> "give explicit control of digital assets to end-users and remove the need to trust any third-party servers and infrastructure".
Distributed ledger technology is one of the key innovations making this shift possible.

A distributed ledger is a type of data structure which resides across multiple computer devices, generally spread across locations or regions.

Distributed Ledger Technology includes blockchain technologies and smart contracts. While distributed ledgers existed prior to Bitcoin, the Bitcoin blockchain marks the convergence of a host of technologies, including timestamping of transactions, Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks, cryptography, and shared computational power, along with a new consensus algorithm. 

DLT generally consists of three basic components:
- A data model that captures the current state of the ledger
- A language of transactions that changes the ledger state
- A protocol used to build consensus among participants around which transactions will be accepted, and in what order, by the ledger.

### Blockchains

According to hyperledger.org
> "A blockchain is a peer-to-peer distributed ledger forged by consensus, combined with a system for "smart contracts" and other assistive technologies."

**Smart contracts** are simply computer programs that execute predefined actions when certain conditions within the system are met.
**Consensus** refers to a system of ensuring that parties agree to a certain state of the system as the true state.

Blockchain is a specific form or subset of distributed ledger technologies, which constructs a chronological chain of blocks, hence the name 'block-chain'.
Timestamping is another key feature of blockchain technology. Each block is timestamped, with each new block referring to the previous block.

A bitcoin block commonly consists of four pieces of metadata:
- The reference to the previous block
- The proof of work, also known as a nonce
- The timestamp
- The Merkle tree root for the transactions included in this block.

#### Merkle Tree




Bitcoin and Ethereum Blockchains
Exploring Permissionless Blockchains
Consensus Algorithms
Hyperledger
Other Open Source Permissioned Distributed Ledgers
Challenges in the Adoption/Deployment of Distributed Ledger Technologies