# Week 2 - How to generate your Market Opportunity Set

## 2.1 - Introduction- the Market Opportunity Set

### The manifold opportunities that can stem from a technology
Technologies are fungible: They can be used to create different product or services for different sets of customers.

Every application of your technology, for a specific set of customers, is one market opportunity for your firm

### Look before you leap
Market opportunity choice - a profound decision -> Why?
1. Shapes your chance of success: Market opportunities differ in their attractiveness. Hence, pursuing a promising option provides the fertile ground for growing your business.
2. The decision is imprinting: The markets your pursue will shape many aspects of the venture, such as its identity, its culture, its employees, etc. These have long-term impact and will not be easy to un-do.

Identifying market opportunities is a difficult task
- choose the most attractive option: Don't waste your time with possibly inferior opportunities
- Unleash the power of multiple opportunities to enhance your agility: keep open potential growth and backup options, to avoid lock-in

#### Some research insights
1. Serial entrepreneurs have learned to generate a choice set of market opportunities before deciding which opportunity to pursue intially.
2. Entrepreneurs can derive key performance benefits from the identification of a market opportunity choice set.

Don't fall in love with your initial idea: a market opportunity set is a true asset for your firm

### What we will learn this week
- Describe core abilities independent of any (envisioned) product
- Identify possible applications and customers based on your core abilities
- Create your market opportunity set

#### The Market Opportunity Set
- **What is it?** The set of potential market opportunities that you can address with your core resources and capabilities.
These can be varied options, related to different types of needs for different types of customers.
- **Why is it important?** A varied set of market opportunities is an asset in and of itself, as it increases you chances of having identified the most promising option. It also provides the basis for a plan B (if requried), and for un-locking new growth opportunities over time.
- **Ho is it done** To uncover valuable market opportunities, start with assessing the generic functionalities of your core abilities. Try to understand what other applications are feasible with them... for different types of customers
*Worksheet 1 will guide you through this process*

#### The main take-aways from this stage
- Enhance your cognitive flexibility, to become more alert to other promising opportunities
- Have options at hand, as it gives you the power of choosing, and the power of staying agile
- Leave some long-held assumptions behind (like "this is already the perfect market for me")
- Explore what else may be in store for you!

## 2.2 - What are your unique abilities?
### The de-linking process


## 2.3 - Identifying applications and customers for your unique abilities

## 2.4 - The outcome- your market opportunity set

## 2.5 - Wrap up
