# Week 3 - How to evaluate your market opportunities

We will explain how to assess the attractiveness of your market opportunities following the structured process of Worksheet 2, and how to combine all the bits of information into one clear map. By the end of this session, you will be able to apply worksheet 2 of the Market Opportunity Navigator and to map your opportunities on the Attractiveness Map.

## 3.1 - Introduction- the Attractiveness Map
The importance of opportunity evaluation.

- Recap: What is a market opportunity? Every application of your technology, for a specific set of customers. But when you have a set of options, which one is more valuable and attractive?

#### Evaluating a market opportunity
- how big is the potential of this opportunity?
- how challenge will it be for us to pursue it?
- Market choice is key for creating value and obtaining cash flow
- Market Choice is imprinting your venture in fundamental ways (firm identity, culture, structure, brand name)

#### Evaluating your opportunity is really difficult
- There are always tradeoffs
- There is always uncertainty (normal when bringing innovation to the marketplace), update your data when uncertainty goes away
- The landscape is constantly changing: the Market Opportunity Navigator is designed to be a dynamic tool.

### 3.1.2 - What we will learn this week
- Estimate the value creation potential of a market opportunity
- Estimate the value capture challenge of a market opportunity
- Map your options on the Attractiveness Map (second step from Market Opportunity Navigator)

#### The Attractiveness Map
**What is it?** The Attractiveness Map allows you to visually depict the evaluation of your market opportunities, so you can better grasp their upsides and downsides, and compare them with each other.

**Why is it important?** This visualization helps you in determining your most valuable options, at a given point in time, so that you can make an informed decision about which markets to play in- one that relies less on intuition and suffers less from biases.

**How is it done** You assess the attractiveness of a potential market opportunities by evaluating their value creation potential(y) and value creation challenge(x).
You rate each optio on both dimmensions and then can locate it on the map.

#### An attractive Market Opportunity
- Potential: how big, if worth, value creation
- Challenge: obstacles, risks, difficult level.

Best options high potencial and low challenge.

#### Worksheet 2 will guide you through this process
**Market Opportunity Evaluation**
- Potential: Compelling reason to buy, market volume, economic vialability
- Challenge: Implementation Obstacles, Time to revenue, external risks 

#### The main take-aways from this step
- It's a learning processs: ask the most important questions before making a critical decision
- Figure out the main assumptions that still need to be validated
- Use Worksheet 2 & Attractivess Map to facilitate team discussion
- Key Benefit: The ability to drill down and to see the big picture at the same time

### 3.1.3 - The learning process

The evaluation is one of the most important steps: adopt the learning mindset
- Be systematic in your learning, be consistent.
- Turn hypotesis into knowledge: perform desk research and go out the building and talk with customers and market experts. If feasible, conduct experiments (design thinking, lean startup)
- Get used to uncertainty (known unknown, unknown unknown)

#### What you need to learn
Before you can get to the actual scoring of your options based on their Potential and their Challenge:
1. **Learn about your Customers' World**. Put in their shoes. What is the Value Proposition, what pain are you addressing, why is your solution better than current ones. What do these customers value and what important trends influence them?
2. **Learn about your Business Environment** *Understand the value chain*: string of companies or players that work together to satisfy the market demand for a given product. *Know your competitors*: You will need to understand where you will fit in this value chain, who could stand in your way, and who has an incentive to collaborate with you. Innovative ideas often break existing value chains and change them completely.
3. **Understand your key implementation milestones** what you still need to develop in order to create and deliver your product. What are your resources and capabilities, what you already have and what you still need to develop: tech know-how, human capital, allies and partners, financial resources.


#### Source for Learning
`Desk Research`:
- google analytics and trends
- market studies
- competitors annual reports
- government information
- anything that can help you in building a clearer picture about your business opportunity.

`Get out of the building` and face your market to be able to truly understand it.
 - Target Customer: Personal Interviews & Surveys (what they DO)
 - Trade shows
 - conferences
 - Market experts

#### How to Score your Opportunities?
For each factor that contributes to the Potential or to the Challenge of an opportunity:
- Gather all the information that you can beforehand
- Combine your qualitative and quantitative insights
- Strive to be as objective as possible
- Encourage team discussions

`Don't get frustrated about scoring`:
- Remember that the overall goal is to understand the main upsides and downsides of each opportunity
- You can also refine your scoring over time, as you learn more about each option
- Overall, this process will help you to recognize the patterns and to distinguish between your options, to reveal your most promising opportunity

#### Summary
Take time to research and study, and to gather all the knowledge you can, before you make the fundamental decision of which market(s) to play in.  
Adopt a learning mindset AND accept uncertainty.
Workshop 2 will assist you in evaluating your market opportunities.

### Discussion prompt: Share your experience

## 3.2 - Evaluating the potential of a market opportunity

### 3.2.1 - How to estimate the potential of an opportunity
An attractive Market Opportunity: Potential and Challenge.
Worksheet 2: Market Opportunity Evaluation

#### Value Creation Potential
The potential of a market opportunity is shaped by three primary factors:
- 1) Compelling reason to buy: Will someone really want our offerand be willing to pay for it?
- 2) Market Volume: How big is this market, now and in the near future.
- 3) Economic Viability: Is it worthwhile from a business perspective to pursue this market?

#### 1) Compelling reason to buy
`low -> mid -> high -> super high`

How to evaluate? Look deeply into three important questions:
- Is there a real unmet need?
- Can we provide an effective solution to this need?
- Can we address it better than current solutions?

Why would customers prefer your product? Are the advantages of your solution really meaningful for your customers.

*Important to Remember*: The only way to score this factor is to look through the eyes of your customers: It's now what you think, it's what they think- what they say and what they do.
Validate your believes, go out of the building and talk about this market opportunity with as many potential customers as possible.

#### 2) Market Volume
`low -> mid -> high -> super high`

How to evaluate? Look deeply into two important questions:
- What is the size of the current market?
- How much is it expected to grow over time? 
 
A market which is not significantly big may still be an interesting option, especially if it can serve as a stepping stone towards a larger market that will be exploited in the future.

*Important to Remember*: You can measure the size of a market (We recommend to break down the size of the market into two element- units and dollars) in a top down or bottom up approach. For completely new markets - that have no customers, no competitors, and no products yet - measuring the size of the opportunity is more of a ´guesstimation´ than an exact evaluation.

Steve Blank suggests that there are three main types of markets- existing, resegmented, and new.

#### 3) Economic Viability
`low -> mid -> high -> super high`

How to evaluate? Look deeply into three important questions:
- Do you have a sizeable margins? price - cost of product
- Are the customers well-funded enough to pay the price?
- How sticky will customers be? rebuy, switch to other alternatives

*Important to Remember*: Make sure that you have enough slack between the cost of your offer and how much customers are willing to pay for it. Talk with your 'economic buyers' to understand their perspective, and search for comparable offers that can serve as a signal for how much you can charge for your offering.

#### Potential - the overall rating
- Combine the ratings of the three key factors into an overall score
- You can assign different weights to different factors, but if you do so - make sure to be consistent across options

#### Summary
Assessing the potential of a market opportunity is critical to your evaluation because it allows you to understand the value that could be created by exploiting this opportunity.

While the average potential score enables you to easily distinguish between your options, it may also hide some important information regarding the key upsides or downsides of the market opportunity.
However, by now you should be clearly familiar with the main advantages and disadvantages of your opportunity and that is actually the main goal of this analysis.

### 3.2.2 Augury’s case study
Market Opportunity Set: 5 options
Market Opportunity Evaluation: HVAC for commercial buildings -> Overral Potential


## 3.3 - Evaluating the challenge of a market opportunity
Video: How to estimate the challenge of an opportunity
Video: Augury’s case study
Practice quiz
Video: Key scoring considerations


## 3.4 - The outcome- your Attractiveness Map
Video: Mapping your options on the Attractiveness Map
Video: The different quarters of the Attractiveness Map
Discussion prompt: Opportunities across the attractiveness map

## 3.5 - Wrap up
Video: Flyability example
Video: Common questions
Summary and main take-aways
Assignment 2
Download Worksheet 2