# Week 4 - How to design your Agile Focus Strategy

##  4.1 - Introduction- the Agile Focus Dartboard 

### This week: overview and goals
Overall, our learning goals for this week are:

- Understand the focus - flexibility tradeoff, and how the Agile Focus strategy can help you to achieve the critical balance between them.
- Learn how to analyze the attractiveness map and choose your primary market opportunity, to make sure that you are running in the right direction.
- Learn how to select the backup and growth options that you will keep open, to mitigate your risk and increase your value with minimum effort.

### 4.1.2 - The innovator's challenge: focus and stay agile
Once You understand the value of your opportunities, what market opportunities should you focus on?

A fundamental decision with fundamental implications: 
1. Market Choice is key for creating value and obtaining revenues
2. Market Choice is imprinting the DNA of your venture: culture, organization identity, who you are as organization, kind of people you are going to hire, type of customers
3. Yet...you may need to adapt your choice over time => Focus and Agility

A smart market opportunity strategy has to take into account:
- WHAT are the most attractive market opportunities that you should focus on?
- HOW can you focus and stay flexible, agiel and open-minded at the same time?

**The Agile Focus Strategy** is your way to combine this tow aspects to set an optimal strategy that reaps the greatest benefits from your commercialization efforts.

It balances the tension between focus and flexibility by consciously keeping other opportunities open: those that will allow you to (i) mitigate your risk and (ii) increase your value with minimum effort.

This strategy enables you to leverage your resources and capabilities, so that you allocate them more effectively and avoid a potentially fatal lock-in.

#### Core implications of the Agile Focus Strategy
Allows you to manage your venture with foresight while remaining agile. It supports you in:
- Allocating your resources and developing your technology
- Picking and developing your team and your stakeholders
- Managing your intellectual property
- Building your organizational identity and culture
- Defining your branding and marketing messages

Is about creating a smart portfolio around the most attractive opportunity to enhance agility

### 4.1.3 What we will learn this week
- Understand the major considerations for choosing your Primary Market Opportunity
- Understan which options are suitable for growth, or for backup
- Desing your Agile focus strategy

#### The Market Opportunity Navigator - 3rd Step
Agile Focus Dartboard
- Pursue Now
- Keep Open
- Place in Storage

#### Agile Focus Strategy
- Why is it important? it enables you to hedge your risks and to leverage your competences at the same time, thus allocating your resources more effectively and avoiding a potentially fatal lock-in. It has significant implications for how you build and design your venture.

- How  is it done? choose your Primary Market Opportunity and analyze which other options are suitable for growth, or backup, based on their attractiveness and their relatedness to your primary market.
Decide which options should be pursued in parallel, kept open for later, or put aside for now.

#### The Agile Focus Dartboard
Define your Agile Fous Strategy:
- the market opportunities that you pursue now
- The opportunities that you keep open as growth or backup options
- The opportunities that you place in storage

Worksheet 3 - Design Your Agile focus Strategy

#### The main take-aways from this step
- Designing a smart portfolio actually helps you build and maintain your cognitive flexibility.
- Don't rush your focus decision: take your time to investigate and to make careful decision
- Letting go of potentially interesting opportunities is often the most painful part
- There is rarely a 'perfect' market opportunity

#### 4.1.4 Discussion prompt: Pursuing opportunities in parallel


## 4.2 - Choosing your Primary Market Opportunity
### 4.2.1 - Different scenarios of the Attractiveness Map

#### Designing your Agile Focus Strategy
The design begins with choosing your `Primary Market Opportunity`
Once this is set, you can start planning your smart portfolio of growth and backup options.
The `Primary Market Opportunity` is the option that you want to focus on: the one that you will pursue with full force, investing most of your resources and capabilities in conquering it.

> If you pick all of your market opportunities you are spreading your resources too thinly, you're not getting any traction with any of the market opportunities that you're trying to pursue.

To make a smart choice, you first need to examine the Attractiveness Map, and utilize all the knowledge that you have gathered from the evaluation process.

#### Common patterns of the Attractiveness Map
- `One Clearly Superior Opportunity`: If you have a single opportunity located in the `Gold-Mine` quarter, your choice is relatively easy. Other less attractive opportunities may still be important, as they may serve as your growth or backup options.
- `Diagonal Trade-off`: your options are spread along the "risk-return" diagonal. A preferred market opportunity in this case is not readily apparent. You can choose to begin with a Quick Win, which would serve as a stepping stone for a more significant option in the future, or you can choose a Moon Shot from the very beggining.
- `Options are all Closely Located`: all situated in the same quarter, or they are all be scattered around the middle. In these cases, the best option is not apparent, as opportunities are not too distinctive in terms of their Potential and their Callenge. Choosing depends on our personal preferences or on specific factors in Worksheet 2.
- `No attractive Options`: If all your options are located in the Questionable quarter, you could either try to identify additional market opportunities, or think about how to shape one of your options to improve its location on the Attractiveness Map. Try not to choose a Questionable option as your Primary Market Opportunity.

### 4.2.2 Other considerations for choosing your Primary Market Opportunity
- `Personal fit with the opportunity`: The opportunity should match your personal preferences: your values, your passion, your aspirations, and even your attitude towards risk taking.
Choose a market opportunity that you love, and will continue to love as your venture grows and evolves.
- `Fit with stakeholders' interest`: Key stakeholders, such as current investors or existing partners, may have incentives and interests that are not completely aligned with yours, but have to be considered when choosing your Primary Market Opportunity.
- `Resource constraints`: Sometimes you just have to start with a Quick Win, simply because you don't have the resources to pursue a larger, more challenging opportunity.
Add your current financial and human capital to the equation when choosing your Primary Market Opportunity.
Also consider the resources that you may be able to attract, like venture capital.

#### Dont' rush making this profound decision
At some point, however, you have to focus...How do you know that this time has arrived?
- When learnin reaches a point of saturation: You're doing more customer interviews or collecting more information but you're just not learning more, this is a clear point that a decision is ripe to be made.
- When you are running out of money: You have to raise funds from investors.
- When you have to invest in branding

#### Augury Example
Set and Attractiveness Map

#### Few Tips for Making this Profound Decision
- There is no perfect option
- Make it a team decision (you need them full onboard in this major decision)


## 4.3 - Building a smart portfolio

>>
Section outline
Video: The portfolio logic
Video: Candidates for Backup and Growth options
Video: How to allocate your resources among options

## 4.4 - The outcome- your Agile Focus Dartboard

>>
Section outline
Video: Placing your opportunities on the Dartboard
Practice quiz

## 4.5 - Wrap up Assignment 

>>
Section outline
Video: Flyability example
Video: Common questions
Summary and main take-aways
Assignment 3
Download Worksheet 3
Your feedback
