# Week 5 - Implications and benefits 

Overall, our learning goals for this week are:
- Understand how the Agile Focus Strategy influences key issues in commercializing your innovations and in building your venture
- Learn how to apply the market opportunity navigator over time, to set your initial strategy, your pivoting strategy, or your growth strategy
- Learn how to employ the Market Opportunity Navigator in concert with other well-known business tools, to create a powerful learning process for setting a promising strategy

- [5.1 - Introduction- implications and benefits](5.1---introduction--implications-and-benefits)
- [5.2 - Implications of the Agile Focus Strategy](#5.2---implications-of-the-agile-focus-strategy)
- [5.3 - The on-going use of the Navigator](#5.3---the-on-going-use-of-the-navigator) 
- 5.4 - Using the Navigator with other business tools
- 5.5 - Week wrap up
- 5.6 - Course wrap up

## 5.1 - Introduction- implications and benefits
The Market Opportunity Navigator:
- Step 1: Market Opportunity Set (worksheet 1)
- Step 2: Attractiveness Map (worksheet 2)
- Step 3: Agile Focus Dartboard (worksheet 3)

When ever you need to re-think your strategy, the Navigator can help you to find your path.

To make your learning process broad and complete, use the MON together with other key methods and business tools:
- Business Model & Value Proposition Canvases ( Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur)
- Lean Start-up (Eric Ries)

## 5.2 - Implications of the Agile Focus Strategy
- The resources & capabilities that you will develop and build over time
- The identity, culture and structure of your venture
- The branding & marketing that you will employ in your commercialization efforts
- The fundraising efforts that you will engage in

### 5.2.1 Resources and capabilities
Understanding which market opportunities you want to keep open enables you to develop your resources and capabilities with greater flexibility and agility => Key when you need to pivot to another market, or when you want to diversify to new markets.

- `Build Modular Technology`: don't lock yourself into one particular development path with your technological capabilities to save time and money in short term. Make sure that your R&D team is aligned with this guidance.
- `Cast a Wider Intellectual Property Net`: protect your invention.
- `Build and Involve your Stakeholder network`: this could be your investors, your advisory board, or other potential partners and allies. All these stakeholders need to be aware of your Agile Focus Strategy, and even more importantly, may help you in its implementation. Hence, be smart about picking the right people.

### 5.2.2 Identity and culture
The markets a firm is serving are not only significant for its value creation potential, but also has a powerful influence on the DNA of your firm: what your firm is all about and how others will perceive it.

#### Imprinting the firm's identity
An `indentity` defines what is important and essential to the venture, and provides answers to questions such as:
- Who are we?
- What are we doing?
- What do we want to be in the future?

An identity cannot be changed easily. Hence, it is important to consider your range of market opportunities when developing your ideas of what your firm is and will be about.

> Example Augury: Machines Talk, We listen. We are bringing Predictive Maintenance to new markets.

#### Shaping the firm's culture
A firm's `culture` emphasizes the shared assumptions, values, and beliefs that shape how people behave in a firm. 
Your Agile Focus Strategy will influence the culture that you want to develop and see flourish in your venture.
In particular, you can implement a culture that values agility and innovativeness, as these are key for pursuing your Agile Focus Strategy and for remaining competitive.

> Augury’s founders, for example, initiate periodic breakout sessions in which their
employees gather together and brainstorm for new ideas. These gatherings nurture a culture of innovation and open-mindedness.

#### Shaping the structure of your firm
You can define the roles in the organization, or build your divisions in a way that will be aligned with your current and future market entry plans.
Structure your your firm to remains agile because plans change over time.

### 5.2.3 Branding and messaging
The information shown in the Dartboard is key for choosing your brand name and designing your marketing communication strategy in a way that reflects best what your company is and will be about.
A brand name that is focused on one particular application may lock you out when seeking to enter new markets.

Changing a brand name down the road means losing the reputation and the positioning that you worked so hard to achieve, and usually requires significant financial investment

> GetTaxi changed to Gett

#### Communicating with Potential Investors
The Agile Focus Strategy allows you to showcase the potential inherent in your venture in a simple and intuitive way: you can communicate your market entry strategy to investors, discuss risk mitigation strategies (i.e., backup options) and show how you align your funding needs with your market rollout plan (i.e, growth options).

Include the main outcomes of the Navigator process in your pitch deck and business plan.

Remember that investors are looking for a winning team and not just for a winning idea. Applying the Navigator also signals to investors that your team is rigorous and prudent, with broad insights and long term views.

#### Summary
So before you...
- Develop your technology
- File your patents
- Recruit new Employees
- Engage your stakeholders
- Nurture your company culture
- Pick a brand name
- Design your marketing materials

... make sure to set your Agile Focus Strategy

## 5.3 - The on-going use of the Navigator
If you're not pursuing a valuable market opportunity, you're probably wasting your time, your energy, and your resources.
*Are we running in the right direction—is* therefore one of the most pressing questions for entrepreneurs and innovators.

**Benefits from the Navigator over time**
- Trace back, track & update your decision
- Navigate the pivoting process
- Navigate the growth process

### 5.3.1 Trace, track and update
#### Are You running in the right direction?
Doubts that poke your confidence arise for many reasons:
- External changes in your business emvironment
- Internal modifications in your firm's abilities
- New opportunities that knock on your door

Whatever the reason may be, you can always go back to the structured evaluation of the Market Opportunity Navigation:
- Check your new assumptions
- Support or refute your doubts
- Align your strategy if necessary

> Avoid opportunism, make an evaluation.

#### Trace back, track & update your decision
Progress from: `Intuition -> Informed intuition -> Fact-based decision`

Use the Navigator with the information that you currently possess to decide on your next action items... until you are sufficiently knowledgeable to set your strategy.

Learn more about your current market opportunities and update their positioning in the Attractiveness Map and in the Agile Focus Strategy.
Sistematically work with newly arising market opportunities, position them in the Attractiveness Map and consider them for an updated Agile Focus Strategy.

As you track and update the Navigator, you actually make your learning process and the evolution of your venture more visible.
Date your updates and save them so that you can always go back for a review. This will help you to understand what has changed, and how the logic of your strategy has developed over time.

### 5.3.2 Navigate the pivoting and growth process
#### Pivote
AFS helps you to cope with pivoting more easily, as you will:
- Develop wider capabilities
- Have backup options in store
- Learn about other opportunities along the way

> Update the Navigator to make your pivoting choice more apparent

#### Growth
Once your efforts prove successful, you can use the MON to decide on your next target opportunities. 

Attractiveness and relatedness will be your main considerations.

You may also use the options that you have placed in storage as licensing opportunities, to create an additional income stream.

#### Develop the right DNA
Applying the Navigator framework over time will not only help you in setting a promising strategy, but will also help you in developing a proper DNA for your emerging venture - one that facilitates a structured and through process when important decisions are on the table

#### Summary
MON can be of great value throughout your entrepreneurial journey, so make it a habit to use it, update the Navigator time to time, and set dedicated team meetings to discuss your situation.

## 5.4 - Using the Navigator with other business tools

Video: Combining the Navigator with the Business Model and Value Proposition Canvases
Video: Combining the Navigator with the Lean Startup Method

## 5.5 - Week wrap up

Video: Flyability example
Video: Main take-aways
Optional assignment

## 5.6 - Course wrap up

Summary quiz
Discussion prompt: Your main take-aways
Video: Course outlook
Farewell