# Part 1 - English Vowels Sounds
There are 17 vowels souns in english.
They all have voice (vocal cords vibrate).
First sound `/ə/` is made with the mouth almost closed. As the lessons progress the mouth gradually opens. Final sound `/aiy/` is made with the mouth wide open.

**Index**  
- [u1-/ə/](#u1-%c9%99)  
- [u2-/ɪ/](#u2-%c9%aa)  
- [u3-/u/](#u3-u)  
- [u4-/iy/](#u4-iy)
- [u5-/uw/](#u5-uw)  
- [u6-/iuw/](#u6-iuw)  
- [u7-/ʌ/](#u7-%ca%8c)  
- [u8-/ɛ/](#u8-%c9%9b)  
- [u9-/ow/](#u9-ow)  
- [u10-/oiy/](#u10-oiy)  
- [u11-/eə/](#u11-e%c9%99)  
- [u12-/eiy/](#u12-eiy)  
- [u13-/ɔ/](#u13-%c9%94)  
- [u14-/æ/](#u14-%c3%a6)  
- [u15-/æow/](#u15-%c3%a6ow)  
- [u16-/a/](#u16-a)  
- [u17-/aiy/](#u17-aiy)  

## u1-/ə/
The most common vowel sound in english. Open your mouth very slightly, and make a noise. Lips and tongue are relaxed, the voice makes a short, soft noise.
It can be speeled a, e ,i ,o ,u or combination

### `/ə/` in Unstressed Syllables
#### words
- in first syllable: A-go, Ef-fect, Ex-plain, Oc-cur, U-pon
- in second syllable: so-dA, o-pEn, den-Im, meth-Od, syr-Up, cap-tAIn, pi-gEOn, par-tIAl, sta-tIon, cup-bOArd
- in other syllables: O-ca-sIOn-Al-ly, gA-ra-gEs, poi-sOn-OUs, pan-O-ra-mA, u-nI-ver-sAl

#### when there is no vowel
prism (pris-əm), socialism (so-cIAl-is-əm), nationalism (na-tIOn-Al-is-əm)

#### at the same time that sound `/n/`
doesn't (does-ənt), isn't (is-ənt), hasn't (has-ənt), wasn't (was-ənt), haven't (hav-ənt), didn't (did-ənt), hadn't (had-ənt), shouldn't (should-ənt), wouldn't (would-ənt), couldn't (could-ənt)

#### `le` at the end of word is pronounced `əl`
ablE (a-bəl), capAblE (cap-A-bəl), suitAblE (suit-A-bəl)

#### usage tip
`a,an,the` say them quickly, without emphasis
A book, A cat, A dog, An applE (pəl), An orAnge, An ice cube, thE book, thE cat, thE dog, thE unIvErse

### `/ə/` in Stressed Syllables
#### `/ər/`
Urn, fUr, pUrse, sErve, nErve, EArn, hEArd, yEArns, bIrd, gIrl, fIrst, wOrk, wOrm, tOUrn-A-mEnt, syr-Up

### Phrases
I heard her journey was worth the worry.
The sugar was the color of earth.
The early bird gets the worm

## u2-/ɪ/
Lower your jaw slightly. Lips relaxed (6mm) apart. The sound is short.

### words examples
if, in, big, miss, build, gym, symbol, pretty, English, sieve, busy, women

### Phrases
Jim is in the picture. Miss Smith is thin. Bring chicken for dinner. Listen to this ridiculous list. The pretty women are busy in the gym.

## u3-/u/
Jaw slightly open. Lips 6mm apart in open circel. The sound is short.

### words
put, push, look, book, could, would, woman, wolf

### Phrases
Look in the cookbook for a good pudding.
He would if he could.
It should be good wool.
The woman took a good look at the wolf.

## u4-/iy/
Lips 1cm appart, widen into a big smile. The sound is long (count to two)

### words
be, he, we, bee, see, sweet, marry, happy, key, honey, cheap, fear, people, amoeba, either, receive, niece, ski, police, suite, chassis, debris, chamois.
/bi, hi, wi, bi, si, swit, ˈmɛri, ˈhæpi, ki, ˈhʌni, ʧip, fɪr, ˈpipəl, əˈmibə, ˈiðər, rəˈsiv, nis, ski, pəˈlis, swit, ˈʧæsi, dəˈbri, ˈʃæmi/

### usage tips
- e from `the` is pronounced `/iy/` when following with vowel: 
  - the apple, the elephant, the ice, the orange, the onion, the ocean, the umpire.
  - /ði ˈæpəl, ði ˈɛləfənt, ði aɪs, ði ˈɔrənʤ, ði ˈʌnjən, ði ˈoʊʃən, ði ˈʌmˌpaɪər/
- `/iy/` sound at the end of word indicates an adjective: 
  - tricky, edgy, soapy, chilly, sticky, shaky, heavy, easy
  - /ˈtrɪki, ˈɛʤi, ˈsoʊpi, ˈʧɪli, ˈstɪki, ˈʃeɪki, ˈhɛvi, ˈizi/
- adverbs en in `ly` pronounces `/liy/`: 
  - nicely, plainly, quickly, sweetly, slowly, clearly
  - /ˈnaɪsli, ˈpleɪnli, ˈkwɪkli, ˈswitli, ˈsloʊli, ˈklɪrli/
- final `/iy/` sound after name can indicate endearment or informality: sweetie, Bobby, Susie, mommy, daddy, cutie

### Practice
- Jeanie, do you see the bees? /ˈʤini, dʊ jʊ si ðə biz?/
- Please freeze the peas. /pliz friz ðə piz./
- Neither he nor she believes me. /ˈniðər hi nɔr ʃi bɪˈlivz mi./
- We can easily read the agreement /wi kən ˈizəli rid ði əˈgrimənt/

### contrasting `/I/` vs `/iy/`
bit-beet, sit-seat, rip-reap, lip-leap, live-leave, did-deed, hill-heel/heal/he'll, mill-meal, pill-peel/peal, lick-leak/leek, rich-reach, pick-peack/peek, dim-deem, dip-deep, sin-seen/scene, fist-feast, sis-cease, his-he's, ship-sheep, chip-cheap

/bɪt-bit, sɪt-sit, rɪp-rip, lɪp-lip, lɪv-liv, dɪd-did, hɪl-hil, mɪl-mil, pɪl-pil, lɪk-lik, rɪʧ-riʧ, pɪk-pik, dɪm-dim, dɪp-dip, sɪn-sin, fɪst-fist, sɪs-sis, hɪz-hiz, ʃɪp-ʃip, ʧɪp-ʧip/

### Practice
- Six sheep were sick on the ship. /sɪks ʃip wər sɪk ɑn ðə ʃɪp./
- Jim eats cheap chips. /ʤɪm its ʧip ʧɪps./
- He leaves me this measly little meal. /hi livz mi ðɪs ˈmizli ˈlɪtəl mil./
- She's as thin as he is. /ʃiz əz θɪn əz hi ɪz./
- Please peel the beets and string the beans. /pliz pil ðə bits ənd strɪŋ ðə binz./


### recognition practice
sin|scene, live|leave, his|he's, hill|he'll, sit|seat

## u5-/uw/
Lips 1cm appart, tense, pushed forward into a small circle.

### words
do, lose, who, two, canoe, shoe, loose, choose, food, through, soup, flu, rude, juice, due, blue, Tuesday, rheumatism, flew, new, lieu
> /du, luz, hu, tu, kəˈnu, ʃu, lus, ʧuz, fud, θru, sup, flu, rud, ʤus, du, blu, ˈtjuzˌdeɪ, ˈruməˌtɪzəm, flu, nu|nju, lu/

### Practice
Sue knew the truth. /su nu ðə truθ./
Choose blue for the new room. /ʧuz blu fər ðə nu rum./
It blooms soon, in June. /ɪt blumz sun, ɪn ʤun./
The news is too gloomy /ðə njuz ɪz tu ˈglumi/  

### contrasting `/u/` vs `/uw/`
full-fool, stood-stewed, would/wood-wooed, hood-who'd, pull-pool, cookie-kooky, nook-nuke

> /fʊl-ful, stʊd-stud, wʊd/wʊd-wud, hʊd-hud, pʊl-pul, ˈkʊki-ˈkuki, nʊk-nuk/

### contrast feature
Lou couldn't fool Sue. /lu ˈkʊdənt ful su/
Stu wouldn't move the cooking school. /stu ˈwʊdənt muv ðə ˈkʊkɪŋ skul/
The good pool room is booked for Tuesday at noon. /ðə gʊd pul rum əz bʊkt fər ˈtuzˌdeɪ ət nun/
The cook stood and looked at his new shoes. /ðə kʊk stʊd ənd lʊkt ət ɪz nu ʃuz/

## u6-/iuw/
Combination of `/iy/` and `/uw/`. Lips 1cm apart. Start with big smile, then push them forward into a circle. Sound is short.

### words
use, cute, music, yew, few, ewe, view, feud, beauty, you, hue
> /juz, kjut, ˈmjuzɪk, ju, fju, ju, vju, fjud, ˈbjuti, ju, hju/

### in unstressed syllables from `/iuw/` to `/iə/`
figure, failure, union, usually, canyon, medium, accurate, accusation, immunize, your
> /ˈfɪgjər, ˈfeɪljər, ˈjunjən, ˈjuʒəli, ˈkænjən, ˈmidiəm, ˈækjərət, ˌækjuˈzeɪʃən, ˈɪmjuˌnaɪz, jʊər/

### usage tips
- u pronounced as a vowel: an umbrella, an understanding, an understatement, an ugly situation, an unusual occurrence /ən ˈʌmˌbrɛlə, ən ˌʌndərˈstændɪŋ, ən ˈʌndərˌsteɪtmənt, ən ˈʌgli ˌsɪʧuˈeɪʃən, ən ənˈjuʒˌuəl əˈkɜrəns/
- u pronounced as /iuw/: a union, a use, a useful gadget, a utility, a usual occurrence /ə ˈjunjən, ə jus, ə ˈjusfəl ˈgæʤət, ə juˈtɪləti, ə ˈjuʒuəl əˈkɜrəns/
- eu pronounced a /iuw/: a euphoric sensation, a euphemism, a eulogy, a European /ə juˈfɔrɪk sɛnˈseɪʃən, ə ˈjufəˌmɪzəm, ə ˈjuləʤi, ə ˌjʊrəˈpiən/

#### featured combinations
This is a universal truth. /ðɪs ɪz ə ˌjunəˈvɜrsəl truθ/
It is a university in New York. /ɪt əz ə ˌjunəˈvɜrsəti ɪn nju jɔrk/
They will form a union. /ðeɪ wɪl fɔrm ə ˈjunjən/
This is a usual occurrence. /ðɪs ɪz ə ˈjuʒuəl əˈkɜrəns/

### Practice
A few beauties were in the picture. /ə fju ˈbjut̬iz wər ɪn ðə ˈpɪkʧər/
Your cues are confusing. /jər kjuz ər kənˈfjuzɪŋ/
He was accused of abuse. /hi wəz əˈkjuzd əv əˈbjus/
Are you used to using the computer? /ɑr jʊ just tə ˈjuzɪŋ ðə kəmˈpjut̬ər?/

## u7-/ʌ/
Lips 1cm apart. Mouth slightly open. Short sound

### words
up, under, love, done, son, cousin, trouble (bəl), rough, flood, blood, does, was
> `/ʌp, ˈʌndər, lʌv, dʌn, sʌn, ˈkʌzən, ˈtrʌbəl (biəɛl), rʌf, flʌd, blʌd, dʌz, wʌz/`

### practice
Buffy cut up the shrubs. `/ˈbʌfi kʌt ʌp ðə ʃrʌbz./`  
The dust is under the rug. `/ðə dʌst əz ˈʌndər ðə rʌg./`  
The mother won some of the money, but not enough. `/ðə ˈmʌðər wʌn səm əv ðə ˈmʌni, bət nɑt əˈnʌf./`  
I'd love to come on Sunday if it's sunny. `/aɪd lʌv tə kʌm ɑn ˈsʌnˌdeɪ ɪf ɪts ˈsʌni./`  

### contrasting `/u/` vs `/ʌ/`
took-tuck, look-luck, book-buck, put-putt, could-cud

`/tʊk-tʌk, lʊk-lʌk, bʊk-bʌk, pʊt-pʌt, kʊd-kʌd/`
#### practice
Could you put a tuck in the front. `/kəd jʊ pʊt ə tʌk ɪn ðə frʌnt./`  
Look at us for good luck. `/lʊk ət əs fər gʊd lʌk./`  
The bus looks good, but it's fun on foot. `/ðə bʌs lʊks gʊd, bət ɪts fʌn ɑn fʊt./`  
The hooded one looks tough. `/ðə ˈhʊdɪd wʌn lʊks tʌf./`  

## u8-`/ɛ/`
Lower your jaw slightly, lips 1.3cm apart and tense in half-smile. Sound is short.

### words
egg, edge, step, any, many, can, again, said, says, meadow, head, leopard, friend, heifer, guest, bury
> `/ɛg, ɛʤ, stɛp, ˈɛni, ˈmɛni, kæn, əˈgɛn, sɛd, sɛz, ˈmɛˌdoʊ, hɛd, ˈlɛpərd, frɛnd, ˈhɛfər, gɛst, ˈbɛri/`

### practice
Send Ben for his friend. `/sɛnd bɛn fər hɪz frɛnd/`  
Let's rent a tent. `/lɛts rɛnt ə tɛnt/`  
Esther never gets upset. `/ˈɛstər ˈnɛvər gɛts ʌpˈsɛt/`  
Fred said it again and again. `/frɛd sɛd ɪt əˈgɛn ənd əˈgɛn/`  

### contrasting `/ɪ/` vs `/ɛ/`
pick-peck, bid-bed, lid-led/lead, miss-mess, wrist-rest, lift-left, big-beg, fill-fell, gym-gem, tin-ten, slipped-slept, mitt-met, six-sex
> `/pɪk-pɛk, bɪd-bɛd, lɪd-lɛd, mɪs-mɛs, rɪst-rɛst, lɪft-lɛft, bɪg-bɛg, fɪl-fɛl, ʤɪm-ʤɛm, tɪn-tɛn, slɪpt-slɛpt, mɪt-mɛt, sɪks-sɛks/`

#### **practice**
Pick a peck of pickled peppers. `/pɪk ə pɛk əv ˈpɪkəld ˈpɛpərz/`  
Ed slipped and fell in the gym. `/ɛd slɪpt ənd fɛl ɪn ðə ʤɪm/`  
Evelyn missed the best bid. `/ˈɛvələn mɪst ðə bɛst bɪd/`  
Peg slept from a six 'til ten, then left. `/pɛg slɛpt frəm ə sɪks tɪl tɛn, ðɛn lɛft/`  

### contrasting `/iy/` vs `/ɛ/`
beat/beet-bet, feel-fell, geese-guess, he'd/heed-head, mean-men, read/reed-red/read, seed-said, sealing/ceiling-selling, sees-says, bleed-bled
> `/bit-bɛt, fil-fɛl, gis-gɛs, hid-hɛd, min-mɛn, rid-rɛd, sid-sɛd, ˈsilɪŋ-ˈsɛlɪŋ, siz-sɛz, blid-blɛd/`

#### **Practice**
Please feed the pets and weed the beans. `/pliz fid ðə pɛts ənd wid ðə binz/`  
He said he'd eat the red meat. `/hi sɛd hid it ðə rɛd mit/`  
She says she fell and she's bleeding. `/ʃi sɛz ʃi fɛl ənd ʃiz ˈblidɪŋ/`  
Steve guessed he'd been seen in the shed. `/stiv gɛst hid bɪn sin ɪn ðə ʃɛd/`  

## u9-/ow/
Lips 1.3 cm apart, rounded into circle, beging the sound and move your lips into smaller circle. The sound is long

### words
over, go, zero, plateau, owner, slow, window, yeoman, oh, depot, though, hoe, groan, sew, soul, shoulder, bone, stone, mauve, faux, brooch
> `/ˈoʊvər, goʊ, ˈzɪroʊ, plæˈtoʊ, ˈoʊnər, sloʊ, ˈwɪndoʊ, ˈjoʊmən, oʊ, ˈdipoʊ, ðoʊ, hoʊ, groʊn, soʊ, soʊl, ˈʃoʊldər, boʊn, stoʊn, moʊv, foʊ, broʊʧ/`

### practice
Oh no, don't go!. `/oʊ noʊ, doʊnt goʊ!./`  
Show Joe the snowmobile. `/ʃoʊ ʤoʊ ðə ˈsnoʊmoʊˌbil./`  
Flo chose to row the old boat. `/floʊ ʧoʊz tə roʊ ði oʊld boʊt./`  
Throw your stole over your shoulder. `/θroʊ jər stoʊl ˈoʊvər jər ˈʃoʊldər./`  

### `/ow/` + `/r/`
or, for, wore, war, warm, four, pour, poor, door, soar, board, toward, drawer
> `/ɔr, fɔr, wɔr, wɔr, wɔrm, fɔr, pɔr, pʊr, dɔr, sɔr, bɔrd, təˈwɔrd, drɔr/`

#### **practice `/or/`**
Your war stories are boring. `/jər wɔr ˈstɔriz ər ˈbɔrɪŋ/`  
He wore shorts to the store. `/hi wɔr ʃɔrts tə ðə stɔr/`  
Pour four more quarts. `/pɔr fɔr mɔr kwɔrts/`  
Morton's court report was short. `/ˈmɔrtənz kɔrt rɪˈpɔrt wəz ʃɔrt/`  

### contrasting `/ʌ/`-`/ow/`
fun-phone, rum-roam, dove-dove, come-comb, hum-home, crumb-chrome, shun-shone, rub-robe, mud-mode|mowed, rug-rogue, cup-cope, nut-note
> `/fʌn-foʊn, rʌm-roʊm, dʌv-doʊv, kʌm-koʊm, hʌm-hoʊm, krʌm-kroʊm, ʃʌn-ʃoʊn, rʌb-roʊb, mʌd-moʊd, rʌg-roʊg, kʌp-koʊp, nʌt-noʊt/`

#### **practice**
Bud wrote one note home. `/bʌd roʊt wʌn noʊt hoʊm/`  
Rose coped with the crumbs. `/roʊz koʊpt wɪð ðə krʌmz/`  
Lola rubbed the mud from the old rug. `/ˈloʊlə rʌbd ðə mʌd frʌm ði oʊld rʌg/`  
Phone him at home just for fun. `/foʊn hɪm æt hoʊm ʤʌst fɔr fʌn/`  

## u10-/oiy/
Combination of `/o/` and `/iy/`. Lips 1.3 cm apart, begin in circle, then move quickly to form a wide smile, lips 1cm apart. Sound is long.

### words
boy, toy, boil, soil, coin, poise, noisy
> `/bɔɪ, tɔɪ, bɔɪl, sɔɪl, kɔɪn, pɔɪz, ˈnɔɪzi/`

### practice
Roy's toys are noisy. `/rɔɪz tɔɪz ɑr ˈnɔɪzi/`  
The boy pointed to the poison. `/ðə bɔɪ ˈpɔɪntəd tu ðə ˈpɔɪzən/`  
Troy's ploy was foiled. `/trɔɪz plɔɪ wʌz fɔɪld/`  
The spoiled boy destroyed Floyd's joy. `/ðə spɔɪld bɔɪ dɪˈstrɔɪd flɔɪdz ʤɔɪ/`  

## u11-/eə/
Jaw halfway open. Lips 1.3cm apart. Tense your lips, and form a wide, downward smile. Begin the sound, then move your lips close togheter into the /ə/ position. The sound is long.

### words
ran, fast, pass, craft, laugh.

### `/eə/` + `/r/`
care, dare, wear, bear, aerial, fair, stairs, heir, their, where, there, they're, prayer.

#### practice
The fair-haired man ran in the sand. Where are the spare pairs Stan and Dan wear? They're not your socks. They're theirs. Frances laughed when she passed him on the stairs. They're cramming for their exams over there.

### contrasting `/iy/`-`/eə/`
leaf-laugh, mean-man, clean-clan, fiend-fanned, peace|piece-pass, leaned-land, we're-where|wear, beer-bear, cheer-chair, peer-pear|pair|pare, steer-stair|stare, fear-fair|fare, here|hear-hair|hare, ear-air, tear|tier-tear

#### practice
Sheila ran past the stairs with a can of beer. The lean man cheered and laughed. She can't eat peas from a can. We're in need of a tank of gas.

### contrasting `/ɛ/`-`/eə/`
lend-land, left-laughed, pen-pan, wren-ran, men-man, messed-mast, guess-gas

#### practice
The man laughed, then left. I guess Ann and Ed ran out of gas. Fran passed the pen to the man's left hand. Can Ted send a letter to Stan?


## u12-/eiy/
This is a combination of sounds `/eə/` + `/iy/`. BEgin with /eə/, lips 1.3cm apart, with wide, downward smile. Then slowly widen them into an upwoard smile, forming /iy/. Duration 2 seconds.

### words
ate, face, day, way, cafe, gauge, pain, straight, prey, they, ballet, suede, fiancee, eight, rein, great.

### `/eiy/` + `/l/` = `/ə/`
pale, sail, tehy'll

### practice
It rained eight days. The suede cape has a great shape. Renee ate creme brulee at the buffet today. The rain in Spain stays mainly in the plain. She laid the frail lace on the table.

### contrasting `/ɛ/`-`/eiy/`
red-raid, bet-bait, debt-date, fell-fail, get-gate, mess-mace, pen-pane|pain, wren-rain|rein|reign, test-taste, shed-shade, tent-taint

#### practice
Fred's cake failed the taste test. Get the red dress for your date. Jane's friend fell on the rain. Sell ten shares and trade the rest.

## u13-/ɔ/
Drop jar, lips 1.5cm apart and tense. The sound is long
 
### words
off, on, often, gone, all, call, auto, fault, daughter, caught, awful, lawn, cough, bought, broad

### practice
Draw water from the faucet. The water is always calm in August. I thought Audrey saw a lawyer. You ought to have brought your daughter. 

### contrasting `/ʌ/`-`ɔ/`
cuff-cough, gun-gone, but-bought, lung-long, sung-song, rung-wrong, cut-caught, gulf-golf.

#### practice
Bud was caught with the gun he bought. Sunny has sung all the wrong love songs. Audrey bought the awesome puppies. Maud cut the cuffs from that awful cloth.

### contrasting `/ow/`-`ɔ/`
loan-lawn, boat-bought, coat-caught, oaf-off, loafed-loft, bowl-ball, own-on, boast-bossed

#### practice
Joe caught the mole in his lawn. Paula lost her coat on the long walk. The tall author is his own boss. He bought the old boat, then walked home.

## u14-/æ/
Lips 1.5cm apart form a half-smile, tense lips. Sound is short.

### words
back, cat, tap, bag, pad, cab, plaid, meringue

### practice
Pack the bags. Have a snack, Jack. Pat's cat is fat. Her plaid jacket has balck snaps.

### contrasting `/iy/`-`/æ/`
feet|feat-fat, seat-sat, seed-sad, leap-lap, heed|he'd-had, he's-has, heat-hat, neat-gnat.

#### practice
Please feed the cats. He needs a black hat. Matt has a shack near the sea. She believes that Pete has had a nap.

### contrasting `/ɛ/`-`/æ/`
beg-bag, head-had, met-mat, pet-pat, wreck-rack, set-sat, said-sad, pled-plaid.

#### practice
The pet cat sat on the bed. Pat had a red rag on her head. The men said it had a sad ending. The next guest patted Fred on the back. 

## u15-/æow/
combination of vowel sounds. Begin with /æ/ lips 1.5cm apart, then glide into ow formig a circle with your lips. The sound is long.

### words
how, now, brown, house, aloud, bough

### `/æow/` + `/r/` = `/æowər/`
Very long vowel sounds: 
sour, flour, hour, sauerkraut, power

### practice
Our townhouse has a brown mouse. Are we allowed to speak aloud?. We found our gowns downtown. Shower the flowers for an hour. How's the sauerkraut?

## u16-/a/
Drop jaw until lips 2cm apart, but relaxed. Sound is short but longer because mouth is wide open.

### words
father, wand, cot, doll, lock, option, honor, honest, encore, ennui, knowledge, bureaucracy

### practice
Roz is fond of dolls. John got an honest job. Bob stopped in the shop for a mop. His knowledge of crops is obvious.

### contrasting `/ʌ/`-`/a/`
hut-hot, buddy-body, cup-cop, rut-rot, shut-shot, putt-pot, gut-got, nut-not|knot

#### practice
Her brother got a hot supper. Some shorts are optional. Buddy dropped the hot cup in the shop. Stop fussing and come up.

- Recognition practice `0/5`: buddy, hot, shot, hat, not
- Dictation practice: `4/5`: cop, shot, buddy, cap, not

###  `/a/` + `/r/`
arm, ark, far, carve, bazaar, guard, sergeant, heart.

#### practice
Are the stars far from Mars? The hard part is to start the car. Sergeant Barton was the guard. He carved a large heart in the bark.

## u17-/aiy/
Double voewl. Begin with /a/, lips 2cm apart, then move to /iy/ position, forming a big smile. The sound is long.

### words
I, I'd, ice, bike, pie, dried, might, choir, aisle, height, diaper, my, fly, guide, guy, buy, rye, indict.

### practice
Ida buys nice surprises. I'm twice your size, Liza!. Try my pie, Ira!. That guy might buy my cycle.