# Part 2 - English Consonants Sounds

Consonant sounds are determinde by:
- the position of the tongue, lips and teeth
- the way air is released
- the use of, or absence of, voice

**Index**  
- [u18-/p,b/](#u18-pb)  
- [u19-1-/t/](#u19-1-t)  
- [u19-2-/d/](#u19-2-d)  
- [u20-1-/k/](#u20-1-k)  
- [u20-2-/g/](#u20-2-g)  
- [u21-1-/f/](#u21-1-f)  
- [u21-2-/v/](#u21-2-v)  
- [u22-/ch,j/](#u22-chj)  
- [u23-1-/sh/](#u23-1-sh)  
- [u23-2-/zh/](#u23-2-zh)  
- [u24-1-/s/](#u24-1-s)  
- [u24-2-/z/](#u24-2-z)  
- [u25-1-/l/](#u25-1-l)  
- [u25-2-/r/](#u25-2-r)  
- [u26-1-/m,n/](#u26-1-mn)  
- [u26-2-/ŋ/](#u26-2-%c5%8b)  
- [u27-/θ,ð/](#u27-%ce%b8%c3%b0)  
- [u28-/h/](#u28-h)  
- [u29-/w,y/](#u29-wy)  
- [u30-/double consonants/](#u30-double-consonants)  

## u18-/p,b/
### `/p/` sound
lips togheter firmly, stop air, then pop lips open. No vocal sound. At the beginning of words, release /p/ with a puff of air

### `/p/` words
pay, pat, peck, pit, pot, play, praise

#### ending `/p/` = puff of air
lamp, limp, harp, sharp, grasp, wasp, scalp, help

#### middle `/p/` before vowel = not puff of air
apple, happy, simple, people, purple

#### `/p/` after `/s/` = not puff of air
span, spend, spill, spoil, whisper, hospital, aspirin, expect

#### `/p/` ending word + word = not pop lips open
Put the topdown. Keep trying. I hope to stop them. It's up there. The map you gave me is helpful.

#### `/p/` ending = with or without puff
Stop!. Read the map. Let's go on a trip. I need some sleep. Never give up.

#### practice
Please prepare the pizza for the party. Pat helped me pick up the papers. Put the stamps on the package. Mr. Bishop paid for the lamp in April. Phillip didn't give me a map. Penny has the hiccoughs.

#### p + h = /f/
#### p silent
receipt, psychology, pneumonia, corps, raspberry, cupboard, sapphire

### `/b/` sound
Lips together and firme: stop air, make voiced sound

### `/b/` words
bag, bread, bulb, observe, cabs, rubber, sobber

#### practice
Billy grabbed the sobbing baby. The bushes and bulbs are abut to bloom. Bob was bleeding and his bones where broken. Maybe Elizabeth brags a bit.

#### b silent
debt, doubt, lamb, comb, tomb, womb, subtle, subpoena.

### contrasting `/p/`-`/b/`
pin-bin, pet-bet, pack-back, pole-bowl, push-bush, pour|pore-bore|boar, punch-bunch, prayed-braid, repel-rebel, rapid-rabid, roped-robed, ripped-ribbed, pare|pair|pear-bare|bear.

## u19-1-`/t/`
### sound
Tongue against alveolar ridge, stop air, then release air. Do not make a vocal sound

### begining words `/t/` = puff of air
tame, tap, team, ten, tip, tray, tree, twin, twelve, thyme

### end consonant + t = `/t/` puff of air
act, lift, fault, can't, apt, last, borscht, text

### superlatives (st|est) = `/t/` puff of air
best, biggest, happiest, worst, smallest, silliest, most, least

### past tense(ed) voiceless consonant = `/t/` puff of air
> voiceless consonants = `/p/`, `/k/`, `/ch/`, `/f/`, `/sh/`, `/s/`, `/ks/`
taped, picked, watched, laughed, washed, passed, faxed.

### st at the beginning of syllable =  `/t/` not puff of air
stamp, step, stove, mistake, faster, history

### st at the end of words
bast, rests, bites, cats, beasts, coats

### end t, next beggin with consonant
She ate three hot dogs. The fat cat sat down on the mat. I'll bet she got the hat with that money. I met them at the market.

### `/tən/`
button, mitten, kitten, bitten, fountain, mountain, important, sentence.

### `/t/` ending phrase = with or without puff
> When the last word you say ends in `/t/` can go with or without puff
He sat on his hat. She put on her coat. They came to visit. He didn't eat. I didn't say that.

### practice
Those tenants tore up the apartment. Leave the stew on the stove for two minutes. Just a minute, please. I put the buttons in my pocket. Stand up straight. Janet washed her skirt and two t-shirts. She wished she had polished her boots. The last time I went to that store, I got lost.

### silent t
often, listen, fasten, hasten, mortgage, mustn't

## u19-2-`/d/`
### sound
Tip of tongue on the alveolar ridge and make a voiced sound. Hold at the beginning and release it with next sound

### `/d/`
day, dime, does, dollar, do, dress, drive, dwarf.

#### end of word, before consonant = hold tongue
tell dad to drive. The bedbelongs to me. The lid fell off. When does the tide come in? The code number is on the back.

#### vowel + `/d/` + vowel
lady, body, faded, graded, harder, order, daddy, muddy, added, city, later, shorter, grated, subtle, little, fitted.

#### past tense {vowel|voiced consonant} + `/d/`
> voiced consonant = `/b/`, `/g/`, `/v/`, `/j/`, `/l/`, `/m/`, `/n/`, `/r/`, `/z/`, `/w/`, `/y/`. letter e before d is silent.

played, stayed, cried, snowed, glued, rubbed, hugged, loved, judged, rolled, hemmed, canned, feared, buzzed.

#### past tense `/d/` or `/t/` = `/əd/`
faded, ended, landed, folded, loaded, wanted, planted, invited, created, greeted.

#### pronoun + `'/d/` = contraction for had and would
(had) I'd been there before. They'd called us earlier. We'd better stay. You'd better not do that.

(would) I'd help you if I could. He'd come if he wanted to. We'd like a drink.

#### practice
Dan drove us around before dinner. Does donna have a dollar? David didn't do the dishes.

He said it. I got it. She did it.

That bed is old. She had a bad cold. He ate a bit of butter.

Fred is a forty-year-old veteran. Patty sat on the little ladder. Eddy's thirty today. It's a beautiful city, but it's so dirty!

#### silent d
Wednesday, grandfather, grandmother, grandchildren, handkerchief

#### Practice poem
The Surprise Party
`/t/`: They shopped, spent, cooked, ate, Drank, gossiped, laughed, baked, Stopped and talked, Worked and walked.
`/d/`: They planned, saved, sewed, schemed, Programmed, whispered, giggled, dreamed, Enjoyed and played, A party made.
`/əd/`: They decorated and waited, They shouted and celebrated.

#### Tongue twister `/t/`, `/d/`
The Tutor
A tutor who tooted the flute. Tried to teach two young tooters to toot, Said the two to the tutor: "Is it harder to toot, or to tutor two tooters to toot?"



## u20-1-/k/
### sound
Bring back of the tongue to tje velum, stop the air, then release it with a voiceless sound.

### examples
cat, cost, clean, crazy, kettle, khaki

### word end consonant + `/k/` = puff of air
frank, ink, work, fork, ask, mosque, talk, walk

### `/k/` + `/w/` = not puff of air
quick, queen, question, quite

### `/k/` in middle of word before vowel = not puff of air
lanky, asking, monkey, sticky, tickle, wicked, uncle, chocolate, lacquer, sacharine

### `/s/` + `/k/` = not puff of air
skin, skate, basket, scrape, school, schedule

### `/k/` before other consonant = stop air + next sound
asks, likes, bakes, asked, like, baked, action, actor, picture, anxious.

### examples
Pick the music up tomorrow. Look at the black bike over there. I'll make a cake in the morning. Did Rick rake the leaves? Luke fell off his bike and scraped his skin.

### work of sentence end in `/k/` = with or without puff of air
Don't look! That's a fake. I have a stomach ache.

### practice
Can you cut the cake for me? Carolyn couldn't come to the concert. His wicked uncle has no scruples. Mike and Jack can work quickly. He walks to the bank every day. They talked and asked questions.

### silent k
know, knew, knowledge, knee, knife, blackguard

### silent c
indict

## u20-2-/g/
### sound
Bring the back of the tongue to the velum, stop air briefly, then release it with a voiced sound

### words
game, glad, grade, egg, eggs bigger, rugged, ghost

### practice
Go get your grandmother's glasses. Peggy begged to go to the art galley. Gloria gives gracious get-togheters. Please give me eight gallons of gas. Maggie bagged all the groceries. Gayle dragged the rugged luggage through the gate,

### contrasting `/k/`-`/g/`
cot-got, cane-gain, came-game, come-gum, clean-glean, curl-girl, rack-rag, back-bag, pick-pic, hawk-hog, bicker-bigger, sacked-sagged, tacked|tact-tagged.

### recognition
1)rag or rack? 2)hawk or hog. 3) glue or clue 4)back or bag

### n + g = `/ŋ/` (u26)
### silent g
phlegm, diaphragm, sign, champagne, lasagna, caught, taught, bought, brought, through, though, height, weight, eight, might, light, campaign, reign.

## u21-1-/f/
### sound
Place the top teeth firmly on the inside of the bottom lip; release the air continuously with no voice

### words
fall, fish, food, fresh, flower, after, baffle, puffed, muff, half, often, phone, trophy, Ralph, Ralph's, sapphire, laugh, laughs, laughed, tough, cough.

### practice
Freddy found fresh flowers for his friend. Francie lifted her finger to show off her sapphire. Ralph's life is tough, but he laughs. Phil's life is soft, but he frets. He ate the fish and half a loaf of bread, then left.

### contrasting `/p/`-`/f/`
pin-fin, peel-feel, pine-fine, paid-fade, pail-fail, pare|pair|pear-fare|fair, peer-fear, pork-fork, pile-file, pour-four, pray-fray, pride-fried, pieced-feast, pup-puf, sipped-sift, ripped-rift

#### recognition
1) peel or fell. 2) pine or fine. 3) pork or fork 4) pair or fair.

#### practice
One fresh fall day, Paul went to the fair, to find some fun and food. But while hopping a fence, He ripped his pants, Which put him in a foul mood. But he found a fine friend, And prayed she would mend, The rip before it could fray; And although he was pieced, With a patch on the seat, He went to the feast anyway.

## u21-2-/v/
like `/f/` but voiced
### sound
Place the upper teeth against the inside of the lower lip, and release the air with a voiced sound.

### words
vine, vote, favor, ever, envy, save, five, believe, of, saves, believes, saved, loved.

### I|you|we|they have contraction = `'ve`
I've been there. You've seen it. We've won. They've gone.

### practice
Evelyn arrived in evening gloves at eleven. Val survived the five-hour drive. She is obviously envious, and I love it. It takes a lot of nerve to drive over there in the van. They've never voted in Virginia before.

### contrasting `/b/`-`/v/`
bet-vet, base-vase, berry|bury-very, buys-vise, bail|bale-veil|vale, ballet-valet, bent-vent, best-vest, marble-marvel, Serbs-serves. 

### recognition
1) bet or vet. 2) ballet or valet. 3) best or vest. 4)bail or vail.

## u22-/ch,j/
### `/ch/`
#### sound
place the center of the tongue on the palate: stop the air completely, then release it abruptly with a voiceless sound.

#### words
chase, chance, reaching, lunch, lunches, reached, catch, catching, catches, watched, question.

#### `/iuw/` + `/t/` = `/ch/`
situation, ritual, factual, congratulations, let you, don't you, won't you, can't you, didn't you, wouldn't you.

#### practice
The teacher chose Chinese Checkers for the children. Charles and Chuck lunched on cheese and chips. Couldn't you eat your lunch, and then watch the match? Didn't you watch the speech on channel 7? I can't let you exchange the watch.

#### silent ch
yacht

### `/j/`
like `/ch/` but voiced

#### words
jam, just, ajar, major, germ, gym, agency, region, huge, bridge, judged, edges, soldier.

#### `/d/` + `/iuw/` = `/j/`
education, gradute, individual, did you, would you, could you, had you.

#### practice
I wanted you to come to my graduation. Jim's a junior, majoring in education. Would you please register at the gym? Jill, in her jeans, jumped into her jeep. Janice, did you see the soldier?

## u23-1-/sh/
### sound
Touch the palate with the sides of the tongue and release the air slowly through the passageway formed down the center of the tongue. Do not stop the air flow. Is voiceless sound.

### words
sugar, sure, assure, issue, anxious, shame, shoe, fashion, wishes, wished, tension, mention, chef, chauffeur, machine, social, special, ocean,

### practice
Don't mention her anxious expression. Sean assured me he'd shine his shoes. Share the sugar with Charlotte. She wished she had gone shopping.

### poem
Sharon and Charlotte shopped for shallots. The shallots were shipped from chateaux. Sharon shared the shallots. That were shipped in the box. Should she share the champagne, too? No!

### contrasting `/ch/`-`/sh/`
chin-shin, cheese-she's, choose-shoes, cheap-sheep, chair-share, chop-shop, chip-ship, cheek-chic, which|witch-wish, watch-wash, watches-washes, matching-mashing, matched-mashed, crutch-crush

### recognition
1) chin or shin. 2) chair or share. 3)witches or wishes 4) watch or wash.

## u23-2-/zh/
like sh but voiced

### words
azure, measure, usual, Asia, vision, Persian, equation, garage, beige, prestige, regime, garages.

### practice
They usually watch television for pleasure. She occasionally wears her beige blouse. Take the usual measurements. They found the treasure in Asia.

## u24-1-/s/
### sound
place the center of the tongue against the palate and release the air slowly, but do not stop the air, and do not make a sound with your voice.

### words
say, some, square, small, eraser, fast, leased, scene, kiss, missed, bosses, psychology, cell, recent, acid, face, waltz, waltzed

### x = `/k/` + `/s/`
ax, relaxed, saxophone, expect, extra, exercise, fix, fox, tuxedo

### `/s/` at begining of word = avoid add vowel
I speak spanish ("Ice peaks panish"). Steve spends his pennis on stamps. Scott skates at a special skating rink. Stacy stays in the States with her stepsister.

### pronounce `/s/` when
it follows by the voiceless consonant sounds `/p/`, `/t/`, `/k/`,  `/f/`, `/θ/`
- final `s` of plurals and 3rd person (he, she, it)
- `'s` indicating possesion or contraction of is|us

**Noun plurals**: maps, hats, socks, beliefs, graphs, baths, wasps, tests, tasks

**3rd-person singular verbs**: tapes, hits, cooks, looks, laughs, grasps, tastes, asks

**Possesives**: Pat's, Jack's Ruth's, Miss Crist's 
**contractions**: let's (let us), it's (it is), that's (that is), what's (what is)

### practice
Let's sew some snowsuits, said Sally. The sly fox sits in the forest and waits. Let's ask the guests for a list of requests. Miss Smith cooks the best feasts. Send Sue to the store on Saturday. Small Stephen still smiles sweetly. Stephanie slowly spins her sled in the snow. The Spanish speak Spanish in Spain. It's the worst snowstorm I've seen.

### silent s
corps, aisle, chassis, debris, chamois, lisle

### constrasting `/sh/`-`/s/`
shoot|chute-suit, shed-said, shower-sour, shoe-sue, show-sew|sow|so, shame-same, sheet-seat, she'd-seed, she'll-seal, shock-sock, ship-sip, shine-sign, shelf-self, shave-save, leash-lease, mesh-mess

### recognition
1) shock or sock. 2) ship or sip. 3) shave or save. 4) sheets or seats.

## u24-2-/z/
### sound
like /s/ but voiced

### words
zero, lazy, freeze, xerox, xylophone, anxiety, easy, cousin, cheese

### x sometimes = `/g/` + `/z/`
examine, exact, exaggerate, exist, exert

### contrasting `/s/`-`/z/`
sip-zip, Sue-zoo, loose-lose, rice-rise, place-plays, cease-sees, raced-raised

### Nouns:`/s/` - Verbs:`/z/`
the abuse - to abuse, the advice - to advise, the excuse - to excuse, the grease - to grease, the house - to house, the use - to use

### practice
We can house five of your guests at our beach house. There is no use for that gadget. I can't use it. Victims of abuse sometimes learn to abuse others. When I asked for advice, he advised me to keep quiet. We excused him that time, but there was no excuse for his behavior.

### usage tip `/z/`
Noun plurals, third person present tense verb forms, possesives, and contractions after vowels and the voiced consonants `/b/`, `/d/`, `/g/`, `/v/`, `/m/`, `/n/`, `/ng/`, `/l/`, `/r/`, `/d/` are spelled `-s` or `-es` and pronounced `/z/`.

#### Noun plurals
potatoes, labs, heads, dogs, leaves, rooms, cans, things, prisms
#### 3rd-person singular verbs
cries, sees, does, rides, leaves, breathes, comes, runs
#### Possessives
Bob's, Peg's, Martha's, his, hers, yours, ours, theirs
#### Contractions with is
he's, she's
#### practice
She's my friend's cousin. He reads newspapers and magazines on Thuerdays. He loves his new toys. Susan's cousin leaves on Wednesday.

### usage tip `/əz/` 
After the sounds `/s/`, `/sh/`, `/z/`, `/zh/`, `/ch/`, `/j/`, add the unstressed vowel `/ə/` before the grammatical `-s` = `/əz/`
#### Noun plurals
glasses, wishes, bruises, garages, churches, pages 
#### 3rd-person singular verbs
kisses, brushes, praises, massages, matches, stages
#### Possessives
Bruce's, Trish's, Rose's, Solange's, Mrs. Gooch's, Page's
#### practice
He washes his cars in Charles's garages. She teaches Bruce's niece's friend. Rose's daughter wishes she had new glasses. Mrs. Jones faxespages of messages to our offices. All of Mrs. Watkins's are Rolexes.

### practice poems `/s/`, `/z/` and `/əz/`

#### The Supermarket: Plural Nouns
What's in the store?
- /s/: Carrots, beets, Grapes, meats, Drinks, cakes, Soups, sweets, Leeks, soaps, Lots of treats.
- /z/: Onoins, potatoes, Cans of tomatoes, Breads, medicines, Vegetables, like peas, Non-food items, All kind of cheese.
- /əz/: Lettuces, radishes, Packages, juices, Peaches, matches, Good things for all uses, Spices, low prices, some surprises, No abuses.

#### The Doll: Third-person Singular Verbs
What does she do?
- /s/: She laughs, talks, Wets, walks, Sleeps, drinks, Eats, blinks, And asks for nothing.
- /z/: She soothes, cries, Lies in the crib, Smiles, sings, Comfort brings.
- /əz/: She dances, entrances, Amuses, amazes, And causes no trouble.

#### The Lost and Found: Possessives and Contractions
- /s/: Whose coat is this? It's Jack's or Rick's, And that one? That's either Pat's or Mick's. This hat's pretty, Is it Miss Smith's? It looks like the kind She always picks.
- /z/: These shoes are big, They might be John's. But they could be His brother Tom's. Who knows whose things. Are in these rooms? Those sweaters are probably Old Ms. Blume's.
- /əz/: Galoshes, britches, sashes, watches, Are they Rose's, Or Mrs. Dodge's? They could be Charles's Or Mrs. Welsh's, But they're more likely Someone else's.

## u25-1-/l/
### sound
curl your tongue up; put the under side of the tongue firmly on the back of your top teeth and make a sound with your voice.

### words
lake, love, daily, solve, shelf, film, clean, glass, place, male, animal, alcohol, yellow, filled, will

### subject pronouns + `'ll` (future) = `/l/`
I'll, you'll, he'll, she'll, it'll (it-əl), we'll, they'll

### practice
Lola likes to laugh a lot. That fellow, Luke, loves the bowling alley. She'll like the lovely landscape. We'll  help you fill the glasses.

### silence `l`
half, halves, salve, could, should, would, Lincoln

## u25-2-/r/
keep the tongue back: do not let your tongue touch inside your mouth; round your lipsand push them forward. Make a voiced sound.

### words
race, ride, write, cry, draw, from, green, price, try, through, around, carol, mirror, colonel, bird, orphan, surprise, pair, more, martyr, fears, fires, cared, fired.

### tips
#### `-s` and `-ed` are voiced after `/r/`
`/r/+/z/`-`/r/+/d/`: fears-feared, cares-cared, fires-fired, implores-implored, lures-lured.

#### /r/ + e = to do again
re-do, re-peat, re-decorate, re-write

#### e|o (`/ə/`) + `/r/` = a person who does something
teacher, preacher, lwayer, sinner, reader, speeder, actor, doctor, tutor, executor.

#### adjetive end e + /r/ = comparative form
taller, richer, sweeter, nicer, older, faster, happier, friendlier, shorter, poorer, dearer, newer, younger, slower, sillier, cozier.

#### pronoun ends in -r = possession
your, our, her, their

#### 're = are
you're, we're, they're, there're

### practice
Rita read three very short stories. Roger, the writer, brought thirty red roses. Remember to write to your friends. Robert ran to the store for his mother. There're prettier flowers at the florist's. We're here to remember out father.

### contrasting `/l/`-`/r/`
led|lead-red|read, lift-rift, liver-river, laughed-raft, light-right|write, low-row, alive-arrive, believe-bereave, belly-berry, plays-prays|praise, climb-crime, clam-cram, flight-fright, label-labor, pale|pail-pare|pair|pear

### recognition
10 words
5 sentences

What'll you have? I'll have lemon pie, with lots of meringue on the top. You'll get fat; you'll get sick; you'll be sorry tomorrow. Never mind. I'll have diet pop.


## u26-1-/m,n/
### /m/
perss your lips togheter, make a voiced, humming sound; release the air through your nose.

#### words
maybe, mother, tomorrow, famous, name, them, him, from, games, tamed, camp, comb, climb.

#### practice
My name is Emily. Maybe my mother will make something. I'm coming home with them tomorrow. My roommate's from Maine. I'm from Alabama.

### /n/
place your tongue against your palate and hold it there: make a voiced sound and release the air thoruh your nose

#### words
name, never, know, any, money, funny, and, angel, interest, thin, sane, then, envy, plains, trained.

#### usage tips
- **a** before consonant sounds: a hat, a lock, a man, a nice man, a rose, a sentence, a xerox copy.
- **an** before vowel sounds: an apple, an orange, an extra copy, an inch, an elevator, an umbrella, an apartment.
- **a** before `/h/`: a happy child, a hysterical child, a history lesson, a historic house, a historical novel.
- **a** before h silent: an honor, an honest answer, an honorable discharge.
- **an** when using HLMNRSX by name: an HOV lane, ab LSAT test, an MBA degree, an NBC program, an RSVP, an SOS, an x-ray.
- **n't**: aren't (arnt), weren't (wernt), don't, can't
- **n't** follows `/d/`, `/t/`, `/v/`, `/s/`, `/z/` = `/ənt/`: wouldn't (wud-ənt), shouldn't (shud-), couldn't (cud-), didn't, hadn't, mightn't (maiyt-), haven't, isn't, hasn't, wasn't, mustn't.
- **en** past participle: taken, eaten, driven, given, gotten, frozen, proven.

#### practice
The sun shines. The thin man is an African dancer. Mine is fine. Tony has taken the train. Nancy has many new friends. They haven't eaten the tuna.

#### n silent
autumn, column, hymn.

### contrasting `/m/`-`/n/`
might-night, mere-near, dime-dine, hem-hen, lame-lane, simmer-sinner 

## u26-2-`/ŋ/`
bring the back of your tongue up against the velum, close the air off completlely, and release it through the nose.

### words
long, strong, singing, going, hanger, singer, belonged, belongings, tongue.

### double consonant `/ng/` + `/g/` or `/k/`
finger, longer, stronger, tangle, thanking, thinking, sinking, drinking.

### triple consonant
thanked (ŋ + k + t), anxious (ŋ + k + sh)

### verb + ing = present participle
I'm going. She's looking. They were shopping. We have been looking. The book is interesting. The movie was fascinating.

### practice
The singer sang too many long songs. your fingers are longer and stringer than mine. The rings belong on the singer's finger.

### contrasting `/m/`-`/ŋ/`
rim-ring, rum-rung, sum|some-sung, swim-swing, swimmer-swinger, simmer-singer, Sam-sang

### contrasting `/n/`-`/ŋ/`
lawn-long, run-rung, fan-fang, stun-stung, thin-thing, sin-sing

### contrasting `/m/`-`/n/`-`/ŋ/`
rum-run-rung, Sam-San-sang, simmer-sinner-singer, some-son|sun-sung, whim-win-wing.

### practice
-Sam, how is your son? -He' fine, thanks! You know, he's nineteen now. -What's he doing? -He's going to the University of New Mexico and he's planning to be an engineer. -When is he coming home? -He's coming soon, on the ninth of June.

## u27-/θ,ð/
### /θ/
Hold the tip of your tongue between your top and bottom teeth; force the air out with a voiceless sound.

#### words
thank, thing, thirsty, truthful, wealthy, nothing, something, health, teeth, births, deaths.

#### can indicate the noun form of an adjective
width (wide), depth (deep), length (long), strength (strong), breadth (broad)

#### ordinal numbers (- 1st, 2nd, 3rd) and fractions
fourth...twentieth, thirtieth...hundredth, thousandth, millionth. one-fourth, three-fifths, seven-eighths

#### practice
We both need something for our throats. He thought thirty thousand dollars was nothing. She took an oath to tell the truth.
Thanksgiving is on the fourth Thursday of the month of November. Mathematics is one of her strengths. He may be wealthy, but he's ruthless and uncouth. 

#### constrasting /s/-/θ/
sin-thin, sing-thing, sink-think, sought-thought, sank-thank, sum-thumb, seem|seam-theme, miss-myth, mass-math, pass-path, mouse-mouth, force-forth|fourth, truce-truth

### /ð/
Hold the tip of your tongue between your top and bottom teeth; release the air with a voiced sound.

#### words
they, these, those, the, lather, together, breathing, rhythm, bathe, clothe, breathe, bathes, clothes, soothed.

#### practice
The mother soothed the teething baby. My brother loathes this weather. My brother loathes this weather. Father seethed when he saw these leather pants

#### th silent
asthma, isthmus

#### contrasting /d/-/ð/
dare-there|their|they're, dough-though, den-then, ladder-lather, wetter-weather|whether, letter-leather, utter|udder-other, fodder-father, mutter-mother, writing|riding-writhing, breed-breathe, sued-soothe, seed-seethe, skating-scathing.

## u28-/h/
Keep your tongue free and force air from the throat with a voiceless sound.

### words
hay, hill, hope, huge, hurry, mahogany, Ohio, alcohol, preheat, who, whole

#### unstressed = not pronounced
Words he, her, his, him, has are unstressed, the `/h/` sound is not pronounced.
Examples: I don't know where (h)e is. He gave it to (h)er yesterday. I haven't seen (h)im

### practice
Does (h)e have any hope? Hi! What's your hurry? Howard is hiding in Ohio. They have a huge hotel at Lake Tahoe. Her husband brought home a huge mahogany hutch

### h silent
honor, honest, herb, heir, hour, vehement, exhaust, exhort, exhume, shepherd, John, oh, ah, night-fight-etc, though-through-etc, caught-bought-etc, what, when, where, why, khaki, rhythm, thyme.


## u29-/w,y/
### /w/
Relax your tongue, then round your lips and press them back against the front of your teeth. Make a sound as you release your lips.

#### examples
way, was, where, why, whistle, away, awhile, queen, sweet, twenty, one, once.

#### practice
When will we go away? The wind whistled in the woods. Dwight and Duane went to Guam. Why was there a war? One of the twins walked twenty miles. Wanda wore her white dress on Wednesday. I went for a walk with Walter McGuire.

#### w is silent
who, whom, whose, whole, wren, write, wrong, sword, two, toward, knowledge

#### practice
Why do we have an h in why, and where, when, what and white? Well, there's a w in who, whose and whole, and write when the meaning is right.

#### contrasting `/v/`-`/w/`
vine-wine, very|vary-wary, veal-wheel|we'll, vent-went, vase-ways|weighs, vow-wow, vile-while, veer-we're, vest-west

### /y/
Spread your tongue flat and toward the back of your mouth; do not let your tongue touch the palate. Next make a wide smile with your lips and bring your tongue forward with a voiced sound.

#### examples
yes, yellow, yet, year, mayor, beyond, iron (ai-yern)

#### `/y/` + `/u/` = `/iuw/`
you, youth, use, Utah, usual

#### practice
May I use you iron? Yes, you may use it any time. He's a popular hockey player at the university this year. The Miami lawyer was a triumphant yesterday.

#### y silent
says, prayers

#### contrasting `/j/`-`/y/`
jeer-year, jello-yellow, major-mayor, jam-yam, joke-yoke, jet-yet, gel-yell, jot-yacht

#### practice
Jeremy bought a yellow jet, And then he got a yacht. "Why did you get the yacht," adked Brett, "When you haven't used the yellow jet yet?"

## u30-/double consonants/
Do not release the sound between words

### examples
`/p/`+`/p/`   Keep practicing
`/b/`+`/b/`   Grab Brian's hand
`/p/`+`/b/`   That pup belongs to her

`/t/`+`/t/`   It's not too much
`/d/`+`/d/`   Dad didn't tell me
`/t/`+`/d/`   Don't do that

`/k/`+`/k/`   I like candy
`/g/`+`/g/`   That rug goes here
`/k/`+`/g/`   They like green apples

`/f/`+`/f/`   Keep off Freddie's flowers
`/v/`+`/v/`   I love Vermont
`/v/`+`/f/`   He has lots of friends

`/s/`+`/s/`   That's scary
`/z/`+`/z/`   His zeroes are in the wrong place
`/z/`+`/s/`   His science class is interesting

`/l/`+`/l/`   He'll like it
`/r/`+`/r/`   They are wrong

`/m/`+`/m/`   We named him Mike
`/n/`+`/n/`   Dan knows the truth

`/θ/`+`/θ/`   Are you going with three bags?
`/θ/`+`/ð/`   He left with the dog

### exceptions
`/ch/` and `/j/` must be released before pronuncing another word

`/ch/`+`/ch/`   I can't reach Charles
`/j/`+`/j/`     Will you judge Jack's team?
`/ch/`+`/j/`    She's going to teach geometry
