# Part 3 - Stress Patterns

English words can be divided into syllables. Each spoken vowel sound makes one syllable. A syllable can be:
- a vowel sound alone
- a vowel before a consonant
- a vowel after a consonant
- a vowel between consonants

**Index**  
[u31 - syllabes and stress](#u31---syllabes-and-stress)  
[u32.1 - two-syllable words](#u321---two-syllable-words)  
[u32.2 - introducing second stress](#u322---introducing-second-stress)  
[u33 - three or more syllable](#u33---three-or-more-syllable)  
[u34 - one-syllable prefixes](#u34---one-syllable-prefixes)  
[u35 - two-syllable prefixes](#u35---two-syllable-prefixes)  
[u36 - suffixes](#u36-suffixes)  
[u37 - sentence stress](#u37---sentence-stress)  
[u37-2 - sentence stress practice](#u37-2---sentence-stress-practice)  

## u31 - syllabes and stress
- vowel alone: ho, I
- vowel-consonant: on, ice
- consonant-vowel: to, be, you
- consonant-vowel-consonant: big, tough, cute

There are three stress levels in English: primary (/), secondary (l) and unstressed (-)

## u32.1 - two-syllable words
### primary stress
A word with two vowel sounds has two syllables. One syllable has primary stress. Say it a little louder and longer that the other. The vowel of the unstressed syllable is usually pronounced `/ə/`, no matter how it is spelled. Make the vowel sound short. Pronounce the consonant sounds clearly and distinctly.

#### first syllable (/-)
cli-mate, ac-tor, pleas-ure, sol-dier, danc-es, wash-es, watch-es, fold-ed, seat-ed

#### second syllable (-/)
ad-vice, ex-cite, con-fused, sup-pose, sur-prised

### exceptions
The sounds `/iy/`, `/ow/`, `/iuw/`, and `/I/` often keep their normal pronunciations in unstressed syllables

#### `/iy/`
- first syllable: ar-my, ba-by, ci-ty
- second syllable: re-peat, de-duct, be-gin

#### `/ow/`
- first syllable: ar-row, el-bow, fol-low
- second syllable: o-bey, o-mit, o-kay

#### `/iuw/`
- first syllable: ar-gue, neph-ew, val-ue
- second syllable: u-nique

#### `/I/`
- first syllable: build-ing, den-tist, mu-sic
- second syllable: in-stead, in-sist, im-mune

### tip
The stress patterns `/-` and `-/` indicate the difference between certain nouns and verbs.
`/-` Nouns vs `-/` Verbs: 
`/-` pres-ent, `-/` pre-sent  
`/-` reb-el, `-/` re-bel 
`/-` ob-ject, `-/` ob-ject 
`/-` prog-ress, `-/` pro-gress 
`/-` rec-ord, `-/` re-cord

### practrice
We're going to present him with a present at the reception. His brother is a rebel. He rebels against all the established rules. If you don't object, I will put several objects on the table. "When did you record your last record?," the boy asked the singer.

## u32.2 - introducing second stress
Some two-syllable words have primary stress (/) on the first syllable and secondary stress (l) on the second syllable.

Examples (/l): ac~cent, ath~lete, fe~male, in~come, in~sect, trans~fer

### tips
#### `/l` common in compound words
- Nouns: air~plane, bird~house, black~board, drug~store, hot~dog, land-lord, make~up, rail~road
- Verbs: dry~clean, black~mail, brain-wash, down~grade, foot~note, kid~nap
- Adjectives: bare~foot, care~free, fore~most, home~sick, new~born

#### `/l` nouns `-/` verbs
com~bine, com~pact, con~duct, con~flict, con~tract, con~trast, con~vert, dis~count, per~mit, pro~test, sus~pect

##### practice
The student's conduct was unacceptable. The teacher had to conduct him to the principal. We signed a contract to buy the house. Now we have to contract an architect to remodel it. The young boy's father wouldn't permit him to get a driver's permit. I suspect he is one of the suspects.

#### `/l` Teens vs  `/-` Tens
thir~teen \ thir~ty, four~teen \ for~ty, fif~teen \ fif~ty, six~teen \ six~ty, eigh~teen \ eigh~ty, nine~teen \ nine~ty

seveneen and seventy have an additional unstressed syllable: sev~en~teen \ sev~en~ty

##### practice
Have you seen my teen? She's a high school queen. Between sixteen and seventeen. She can be flirty, act like thirty, Or a baby, then a lady, She makes her mother feel like eighty, Or eighteen.

#### `/ l` Compound word vs `/ /` Modifier + noun
greenhouse \ green house, bluebird \ blue bird, darkroom \ dark room, hotdog \ hot dog, blackboard \ black board

##### examples
The kitchen was a dark room. There was a darkroom in the basement for photos. I saw a blue bird in the yard. I don't think it was a bluebird. They bought a new house with a greenhouse and a birdbath in the back. I live in a white house, but it's not The whitehouse. He said a few cross words when he couldn't finish the crossword puzzle. It was a 100, and Rover was one hot dog. Hot dogs are great at baseball games.

#### `l /` secondary primary stress
car~toon, cash~ier, Chin~ese, post~pone, un~do, un~pack, up~date, with~draw

with prefix re: re~build, re~do, re~check, re~heat, re~play, re~set, re~tell, re~think, re~wind, re~word, re~write

phrasal verbs: back~up, back~down, back~off, call~off, calm~down, clean~up, dream~up, dress~up, find~out, give~back, give~in, give~up, hand~in, hand~out, leave~out, put~on, put~off, slow~down, take~in, take~out, take~off, use~up, wind~up

##### practice
After we unpack, we'll play Chinese checkers. I'm going to the cashier to withdraw the money. She will rewind the cartoon for you. We'll retest your blood and postpone your routine exam. Please slow down, or we'll wind up on the side of the road. Let's find out if we can take off next week. I'll call off the next party if you don't clean up after this one.


## u33 - three or more syllable
Words with three or more syllables have one primary stress, the others are unstressed (with cases one secondary stress)

### stress pattern 1  `/--.`
primary stress is on the first syllable and all other unstressed.
- three-syllable `/--`: a~nimal, cho~colate, fur~niture, hos~pital, vege~table, vis~iting, or~anges, fin~ishes, vis~ited, vis~itor, dir~tier, bus~iest, care~fully
- four-syllable `/---`: for~tunately, in~nocently, per~manently, ser~iously

### stress pattern 2 `-/-.`
primary stress is on the second syllable and all other unstressed.
- three-syllable `-/-`: a~part~ment, ba~na~na, con~di~tion, de~ci~sion, ex~am~ple, pro~hi~bit, to~ge~ther
- four-syllable `-/--`: com~mu~ni~ty, e~mer~gen~cy, ex~per~i~ence, in~fer~i~or, o~ri~gin~al, me~chan~i~cal, se~cu~ri~ty
- five-syllable `-/---`: af~fec~tion~ate~ly, con~si~der~a~ble, con~di~tion~al~ly, co~op~er~a~tive, in~ev~it~a~ble, pro~fes~sion~al~ly 

### stress pattern 3 `/-l``/_l-`
primary stress is on the first syllable, secondary stress on the third syllable and all others unstressed.
- three-syllable `/-l`: al~pha~bet, bas~ket~ball, cat~a~logue, en~ve~lope, ex~er~cise, grad~u~ate, hol~i~day, pho~to~graph, qual~i~fy, re~cog~nize, ta~ble~cloth, tel~e~phone, thun~der~storm
- four-syllable `/_l-`: dic~tion~a~ry, com~pli~ca~ted, el~e~va~tor, or~din~a~ry, tel~e~vi~sion

### stress pattern 4 `-/-l`
Primary stress on the second syllable and secondary stress on the fourth. All other syllables are unstressed
- `-/-l`: a~pol~o~gize, ap~pre~ci~ate, con~grat-u-late, par~ti~ci~pate

### stress pattern 5 `l/-`
Secondary stress on the first syllable and primary stress is on the second syllable.
- `l/-`: ath~let~ic, beau~ti~cian, out~stand~ing, trans~par~ent, um~brel~la, va~ca~tion

### stress pattern 6 `l-/`
Secondary stress is on the first syllable and primary stress is on the third syllable
- three-syllable `l-/`: af~ter~noon, dis~ap~pear, auc~tion~eer, en~gi~neer, gas~o~line, Jap~a~nese, pi~o~neer, un~der~stand
- four-syllable `l-/-`: ad~ver~tise~ment, ap~pli~ca~tion, ar~ti~fi~cial, ce~le~bra~tion, dec~o~ra~tion, e~co~nom~ics, ed~u~ca~tion, in~de~pen~dence, man~u~fac~ture, u~ni~ver~sal

## u34 - one-syllable prefixes
Prefixes are one or two syllable additions that occur at the beginning of some words. They carry certain meanings that modify the words.
- unstressed `-/`: co~operate, con~tinue, com~mittee, de~liver, dis~cuss, ex~hibit, mis~take, pre~pare, pro~test, re~ward
- secondary stress `l/`: bi~o~logy, in~ept, irres~pon~sible, mal~nour~ish, non~poi~sonous, pan-o~ra~ma, post~pone, re~write, sub~let, trans~fer, un~hap~py, vice~pres~ident

## u35 - two-syllable prefixes
Prefixes: ante-(before), anti-(against), auto-(self), circum-(around), counter-(opposite to), hyper-(mote than normal), hypo-(less than normal), inter-(between), micro-(tiny), mono-(one), multi-(many), poly-(many), inu-(one), ultra-(extreme).

### three syllable words `/-l`
primary stress on the first syllable, unstressed syllable and secondary stress on third syllable: an~te~date, an~te~date, au~to~mat, cir~cum~cize, coun~ter~point, mi~cro~scope, mon~o~rail, mul~ti~ply, u~ni~verse, ul~tra~sound

### four or more syllables `/-l--.`
primary stress on the first syllable, unstressed syllable, secondary stress on third syllable, the other are unstressed: an~te~ce~dent, an~ti~so~cial, au~to~ma~tic, cir~cum~ven~tion, coun~ter~clock~wise, hy~per~ac~tive, hy~po~der~mic, in~ter~ac~tion, mi~cro~sco~pic, mon~o~lin~gual, po~ly~es~ter, u~ni~ver~sal, mul~ti~na~tion~al, ul~tra~vi~o~let

### exceptions
- `P--s`: au~to~mo~bile
- `sP--`: an~ti~ci~pate, an~ti~pa~thy, an~tiq~ui~ty, an~tith~e~sis, mo~nop~o~ly, mo~nog~a~mous, mo~not~o~ny

## u36 suffixes
Suffixes are additions of one or more syllables that may be attached to the end of words. they have a grammatical function. Use proper stress. They are almost always unstressed: say the vowel sound quickly and with your mouth almost closed, but pronounce the consonan sounds in these syllables distinctly.

### End in unstressed one-syllable suffixes 
(_:unstress, -:stress)
- **Noun suffixes** im_por-tance_, im_por-tant, grad-u_ate, em_ploy-ee, oc_cur-rence, cur-rent, driv-erm so-cial_ist, gov-ern_ment, ex_pan-sion, hand-some, at_ten-tion
- **Adjetive suffixes**: mu-si_cal, grad-u_ate, cur-rent, brav-er, brav-est, jelp-ful, au_to_mat-ic, ex_ces-sive, mul-ti_ple, jeal-ous
- **Verb suffixes**: want-ed, us-es, read-ing
- **Adverb suffixes**: slow-ly, rap-id_ly, hap-pi_ly

#### Exceptions to the rule
they have secondary stress: `P_s`
- **Noun suffixes**: hol i day, phot o graph, at ti tude
- **Verb suffixes**: grad u ate, qual i fy, crit i cize

they have primary stress `s_P`
- **Noun suffix -eer** : pi o neer, auc tio neer, rac ke teer
- **Adjective suffix -ese**: Jap a nese, Le ba nese. Su da nese

### two syllables suffixes
- **Noun**: sen- a_tor, ste_nog- ra_pher, ther_mom- e_ter, u- ni_son, na_tion_al- i_ty, bi_o- lo_gy
- **Adjective**: ca- pa_ble, Ca_na- di_an, sen- si_ble, rad- i_cal, pret- ti_er, sil- li_est, su_pe- ri_or, sen- so_ry
- **Adverb**: prac-ti_ cal_ly, pri- vate_ly, per-ma_ nent_ly, com_pe-ti_ tive_ly, ser-i_ ous_ly

#### Exceptions to the rule
primary stress on the first syllable of the suffix
- **Noun**: for- ma-tion
- **Adverb**: e-vi_ dent-ly

- secondary stress on the first syllable of the suffix `P-s-`: in ven to ry, dic _ ta tor, me di a tor, so cia lis m

shift to anotehr syllable: 
- `-P--` a pol o gy, `---P-` a pol o get ic
- `P--` cu ri ous, `--P--` cu ri os i ty
- `-P--` e con o my, `--P-` ec o nom ics
- `P--` i ro ny, `-P-` i ron ic
- `-P--` ne go ti ate, `---P-` ne go ti a tion
- `P-s` pho to graph, `-P--` pho tog ra pher, `-P--` pho tog ra phy
- `P--` pol i tics, `s-P-` pol i ti cian
- `P-` pub lic, `--P-` pub li ca tion, `sP--` pub lic i ty
- `P-` schol ar, `-P-` scho las tic

## u37 - sentence stress
When several words are spoken together in a phrase or sentece, certain words are stressed and others are spoken more softly and quickly.

### Stressed Words
Four types of words are stressed in a sentece or phrase. Say them a little louder than unstressed words.

#### 1. Most content words 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs.
Charles Jones taught English. Shirley reads aloud every day. Aunt Janet always makes long-distance calls. Jason plays basketball.

#### 2. Interrogative words
who, whose, when, where, why, what, how -> when tehy begin questions.
Where's Mary's school? Why's Charlie leaving? When's Sally's party? Who's coming?

#### 3. Demostrative pronouns
this, that, these, those -> when not followed by a noun
What's this? That's Jessica's ball. Why are these here? We wanted those.

#### 4. Possessive pronouns
mine, yours, his, hers, ours, theirs.
That ticket's mine. This is yours. Barbara got hers. David sold his. We bought ours yesterday. They gave theirs away.

### Unstressed Words
There is no stress on most function words in a phrase or sentence. Say them quickly, but be sure to pronounce the consonants clearly. 

#### 1. articles a, an, the
Examples: a dog, an apple, the chair

#### 2. Prepositions
Such as to, from, with, in, on, through, for, by, over, under, etc.
Examples: for a dog, with an apple, on the chair, in the house, through the door, of a family, to the hospital, around the room, over the hill, after the concert, before the show 

#### 3. Subject pronouns
I, you, he, she, it, we, they.
Examples: I know the lesson, You found the book on the shelf. She tells secrets to everybody. He talks on the phone too much. We eat fish on Fridays. They travel to Europe a lot.

#### 4. Possessive pronouns
my, your, his, her, our, their.
Examples: my car, your friend, her dress, his brother, our house, their camera

#### 5. Object pronouns
me, you, her, him, us, them.
Examples: I saw him. They told me. We asked her. They warned you. My dad helped us. Put them on the table.

#### 6. demostrative adjectives
this, that, these, those
Examples: This book is interesting. Se bought that house. We like these shoes. Those boys talk too loud.

#### 7. Forms of the verb be
am, are, is, was, were, aren't, isn't, wan't, weren't
Examples: I am here. He is a tal man. They are all sick. We were in the garden. He wasn't late.

#### 8. Expressions `there is/are`
Examples: There is a car in the driveway. There is one apple in the basaket. There is jewerly in that box. There are too many cars on the road. There are five people in the family.

#### 9. The `to` before a verb
Examples: He needs to work. I like to eat early. My mother loves to cook. We want to see the whole movie.

#### 10. Auxiliary verbs
am, is, are, was, were, do, does, did, have, has, had, isn't, wasn't, etc
Examples: I am working in the house. She is talking on the phone. He was helping them. When do we start school? Why does he travel so much? Have you done your work? We have been working all day. He had always told the truth. They had had a bad day.

#### 11. Modal auxiliaries
can, must, have to, should, could, would
Examples: John can come. Joe has to work. Sam should leave. We would like to help. You mustn't go in the street. Kathy doesn't have to work.

#### 12. In the middle of sentence
Who, whose, when, where, why, what, how
Examples: Jenny has a cousin whose name is Smith. Do you know where she lives? Only Courtney knows why she said that. He didn't tell me when to come. I can figure out how to do it.

#### 13. short function words
and, but, or, so, not, if, as, because, wheter, since, until, though, although
Examples: Mary and Bob have plenty of food, such as sandwiches, cakes, and cookies. Joe, not John, has been here since noon. Scott was worried because his wife was so late. I'll stay until he calls, then I'll leave so you can study. Although you're sick, you can eat with Carolyn or Sue. I don't know whether he was late or not. If you eat that much, you'll be as sick as a dog.

### Exceptions
- negative modal, **can't**, is usually stressed.
- when auxiliary verbs and modal auxiliaries are not followed by a verb, they have strong stress.
Examples: She can't help him with the cooking. I'll come to the party if I can. We would lend you the car if we could. Carol has a new car, but Margaret doesn't. He doesn't know I'm unhappy, but I am.

## u37-2 - sentence stress practice

### stress patterns
The money is in the bank. He came over rto talk to me. She can help him with the cooking. I should buy a new dress for the wedding. We could lend you our car. I will send you a letter tomorrow. They're walking to the store. He didn't work because he was sick. Karen and Danny stayed until they kew whether or not Val was coming

### emphasize or clarify statement
- I wanted to go to the **circus** (not the movies)
- They didn't go to **France** (They went to Paris, Virginia!)
- I lost my ring on my way **to** the store (not from the store)
- **He** gave her the money (I didn't give her the money)
- He gave **her** the money (He didn't give the money to me)
- He gave her the **money** (He didn't give her the car)

Be careful not to use extra stress if you do not intend special meaning

### Practice in context
Learning to speak / a language / is a little like / learning to dance. / They both take a long time / to master, / but are fun / from the beginning. / Both require interaction / with another person, / who is saying or doing / something different. / Fluent speakeers / and good dancers / don't have to think / about their skills. / They perform them naturally. / To acquire there skills, / you need a lot of practice / and patience. / Encouragement from someone else / helps a great deal.

Try recording your reading to see if sounds natural.

Last May / we had a surprise party / at my house / for onr of my friends. / It was his fiftieth birthday. / We invited about thirty people, / and most of them / were able to come. / One couple even traveled / all the way from New Jersey. / Several people / who had benn away / for a long time / were here. / Most of the guests / hadn't met each other / before the party, / but they were having / a wonderful time talking / during the half-hour / before the birthday man arrived. / It seemed / that a very special person / was a magnet / for other special people. / When he got here, / he was really surprised, / and happy to see / so many friends. / It was a good party.
