# Week 1

## Focused versus Diffuse Thinking

### Introduction
Researchers have found that we have two fundamentally different modes of thinking: the Focused and the Diffuse modes.  
We're familiar with focusing. It's when you concentrate intently on something you're trying to learn or to understand. But we're not so familiar with diffuse thinking. Turns out that this more relaxed thinking style is related to a set of neural resting states. 

- Focused mode: The concept you're trying to understand that's related to something you're rather familiar with, a know pattern. 
- Diffused mode: You can make new neural connections 

You're either in the focused mode or the diffuse mode of thinking: you can't be in both thinking modes at the same time.

### Using the Focused and Diffuse Modes--Or, a Little Dali will do You

Analogies provide powerful techniques for learning.

Dalí and Edison: 
According to legend, what Edison used to do was he'd sit and relax in his chair, holding ball bearings in his hand. He'd relax away letting his mind run free, although it would often noodle back in a much more relaxed way to what he'd been focusing on previously.  
When Edison would fall asleep, the ball bearings would drop [NOISE] and clatter to the ground just as with DalĂ­. And it would wake Edison up and off he'd go with his ideas from the diffuse mode, ready to take them into the focused mode and build on them. So the bottom line is, when you're learning something new, especially something that's a little more difficult, your mind needs to be able to go back and forth between the two different learning modes. That's what helps you learn effectively.

To build neuro-structure, you need to do a little work every day, gradually allowing yourself to grow a neuro-scaffold to hang your thinking on, a little bit every day and that's the trick. 

### What is Learning?

All of your thoughts, your hopes, your fears are in the neurons in this brain. 

You are not the same person you were after a night's sleep or even a nap. It is if you went to bed with one brain and woke up with an upgrade. 

You will learn in this first week how to take advantage of your unconscious mind, and also sleep, to make it easier to learn new things and solve problems. 

During the lectures you may ask yourself, how does the brain do this? A good place to find out more about your brain is the website [brainfacts.org](brainfacts.org)

## Procrastination, Memory, and Sleep

### A Procrastination Preview

When you look at something that you really rather not do, it seems that you activate the areas of your brain associated with pain. Your brain, naturally enough, looks for a way to stop that negative stimulation by switching your attention to something else. But here's the trick. Researchers discovered that not long after people might start actually working out what they didn't like, that neurodiscomfort disappeared.

**Pomodoro tool**: set a timer to 25 minutes, turn off all interruptions, then focus and give yourself a little reward when you're done.

### Practice Makes Permanent
Thought pattern: Neurons become linked together through repeated use. The more abstract something is, the more important it is to practice in order to bring those ideas into reality for you. Even if the ideas you're dealing with are abstract, the neural thought patterns you are creating are real and concrete. At least they are if you build and strengthen them through practice.
Practice makes permanent. 
When you're learning, what you want to do is study something. Study it hard by focusing intently. Then take a break or at least change your focus to something different for awhile. During this time of seeming relaxation, your brain's diffuse mode has a chance to work away in the background and help you out with your conceptual understanding. Your, your neural mortar in some sense has a chance to dry.



### 

## Summary

## Optional Further Readings and Interviews
