# 10.  Unstressed Words and Words that Reduce
Good American English includes function words that are said extremely quickly.
As you drill them, keep as much relaxation in your face and neck as possible. The more relaxed you are, the more easily you can make these words quickly.

Function words are articles, pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions, particles, and helping verbs. These will generally be unstressed, so they will be faster, lower in volume, and flatter in pitch than stressed syllables. They will be less clear than the stressed syllables in a sentence.

### [A10.1 — Stressed vs. Unstressed](engl.io/a12)
- if [ɪf] stressed, [ɪf] unstressed
- on [ɑn] stressed, [ɑn] unstressed

The unstressed version is quieter, shorter, and has less energy and shape in the voice. It’s little more mumbled.

Notice the IPA is the same for the stressed and unstressed versions.

### kinds of function words
There are several kinds of function words. The words below are just examples for each category, not full lists.
- **pronouns**: I, we, she, me, us, myself, herself, my, your, our, mine, theirs
- **prepositions**: on, in, at, below, to, through, from, till, since, by
- **conjunctions**: and, but, or, for, while
- **auxiliary verbs**: am, are, can, will, has, have, did, do, could, should, would, might
- **particles**: no, not, as
- **determiners**: the, a, an, some, this, that, these, those

Remember, some words can be either a function word or a content word, depending on how it works in the sentence.

### reduced words
Some words go further than being unstressed: they’re reduced. When something reduces, that means a sound will change or be dropped. Generally, only function words will reduce.
Comfortably reducing words, and linking them into the sentence, will transform the character of your speech.

Example:
- for: [fɔɹ] fully pronounced - [fәɹ] reduced
- them: [ðɛm] fully pronounced - [әm] reduced

> Changing a full vowel to the schwa [ə] is a common reduction for many words.

### [A10.2 — Stressed vs. Reduced](engl.io/a14)
- for [fɔɹ], [fәɹ]
- them [ðɛm], [əm]

The reduced version is quieter, shorter, and has less energy and shape to the voice. It’s a little more mumbled.

Perfect American English is about the contrast between clear stressed syllables, and quicker, less important, less clear unstressed syllables. If you fully pronounce every word, you can’t sound American. And, you might be harder to understand.
If you don’t make the right syllables unstressed or reduced, important contrast with stressed syllables will be missing.

## ARE, OR, FOR, and YOUR
### **ARE** fully pronounced: [ɑɹ]; reduced [әɹ]
- Don’t reduce are if it’s the last word of the sentence. For example: I don’t know where they are.

### [V10.1 — ARE Reduction](engl.io/a16)
- What are you doing? [wʌd‿ər_jʊ_ˈdu-ɪŋ]
- you're, we're, they're
- the cookies are good [ðə_ˈkʊk-iz‿ər_gʊd]
- where are the girls [wɛər‿ər_ðə_gɜrlz]
- the kids are there [ðə_kɪdz_ər_ðɛr]
- the kids were there [ðə_kɪdz_wər_ðɛr]

### [V10.2 — Are you Sure?](engl.io/az2)
- Are you sure? ~> da-da-DA ~> [ər_jə_ʃɛr?] ~> ⤴

### [V10.3 — Are you Okay?](engl.io/ayz)
- Are you okay? ~> da-Da-da-DA or da-da-da-DA ~> [ər_ˌjʊ_oʊˈkeɪ] ~> ⤴
- From ʊ_o use ʊ‿o where ‿ is w

### **OR** fully pronounced: [ɔɹ]; reduced: [әɹ]
Fully pronounced, or does not sound like are. But reduced, they sound exactly the same.
Because of the context the sentence provides, it will be clear which word you’re saying.

### [V10.4 — OR Reduction](engl.io/a1c)
When you reduce or, connect to the words in the contect, it should flow. Link it to the word before or after.
- He'll come at 6 or 6:30 \hil kʌm ət [sɪks‿әr] sɪks ˈθɜrdi\
- Do you want to leave now, or wait awhile \dʊ jʊ wɑnt tə liv naʊ, [әr‿weɪt] əˈwaɪl\
- I don't eat beef or chicken \aɪ doʊnt it [bif‿әr] ˈʧɪkən\
- Come here, or you'll be sorry: \kʌm hir, [әr‿jul] bi ˈsɑri\

### **FOR** fully pronounced: [fɔɹ]; reduced: [fәɹ]
For, fully pronounced, sounds just like the number four [fɔɹ]. The number four won’t reduce in a sentence.
Don’t reduce for if it’s the last word of the sentence. For example: That’s what it’s for.

### [V10.5 — FOR Reduction](engl.io/a1f)
- I got it for you \aɪ gɑt ɪt fər ju\
- It's for tonight \ɪts fər təˈnaɪt\
- I bike for transportation, not for fitness \aɪ baɪk fər ˌtrænspərˈteɪʃən, nɑt fər ˈfɪtnəs\
- Let's eat out, just for fun \lɛts it aʊt, ʤəst fər fʌn\
- This medicine is for headaches \ðɪs ˈmɛdəsən əz fər ˈhɛˌdeɪks\

### [V10.6 — FOR Sure](engl.io/a1g)
For sure ~> da-DA ~> [fәɹ_ˈʃɛr]

### **YOUR** fully pronounced: [jɔɹ], [jʊәɹ], [joʊɹ] reduced: [jəɹ]
Both fully pronounced and in reduction, this word sounds just like the contraction you’re. You don’t need to think of a vowel sound here, just the Y sound going straight into the R sound.

### [V10.7 — YOUR Reduction](engl.io/a1k)
[jəɹ] tongue j`/\` r`|\`
- What's your name?
- It's for your project
- Can I borrow your car?
- You're doing great.
- You're in the lead.

### [A10.3 — ARE, OR, FOR, YOUR](engl.io/a1m)
- are, are you there? [әɹ‿jә_ðɛәɹ]
- or, small or large? [smɔl‿әɹ_lɑɹʤ]
- for, for school [fəɹ_skul]
- your, your paper [jəɹ_ˈpeɪ-pәɹ]

##  AT and THAT
- AT fully pronounced: [æt]; reduced: [ət|] or [əd‿]
- THAT fully pronounced: [ðæt]; reduced: [ðәt|] or [ðәd‿]

Don’t reduce that if:
- You’re using that with after or before, to show a sequence in time. Examples: After that, we went to the movie. Before that, I had never even heard of him.
- You’re comparing with this. Examples: This one works better than that one. This is hers and that’s mine.
- You’re using it as an adverb. Here that is indicating an amount, a degree of something, and will come before an adjective or adverb: that much, that big, that small, that important, that hard.
- It’s at the end of a sentence.

For other uses of that, you can reduce it.
Examples where you can reduce that: 
- I thought that you knew.
- This is the one that I got.
- That’s hard.
- Turn it up so that we can all hear.

### [V10.8 — AT Reduction](engl.io/a1p)
- at my [ət|_maɪ]
- at a [əd‿ə]
- I'll be at school [ət|_skul]
- I'll be at her house [əd‿ər]
- at the corner store [ət|_ðə]
- I'm busy at the moment [ət|_ðə]

### [V10.9 — THAT Reduction](engl.io/a1s)
- that my [ðәt|_maɪ] 
- that I [ðәd‿aɪ]
- that you're [ðәt|_jər]
- that her [ðəd‿ər]

### [10.4 — AT and THAT](engl.io/a1v)
Say it like you hear it, not like you think the words should be pronounced.
- that [ðәt]
- that it (Flap T to link!) [ðә‿dɪt]
- thought that it [θɔt|_ðә‿dɪt]
- We thought that it would work. [wi_θɔt|_ðә‿dɪt|_wʊd_wɜɹk] 

- at [әt]
- at the (Stop T!) [әt|_ðә]
- we’re at the [wɪə‿ɹәt|_ðә]
- We’re at the movies. [wɪә‿ɹət|_ðә_ˈmu_viz]

- that [ðət]
- that I (Flap T!) [ðә‿daɪ]
- bad that I [bæd|_ðә‿daɪ]
- The movie was so bad that I left. [ðә_ˈmu_vi_wəz_soʊ_bæd|_ðə‿daɪ_lεft]

## Dropping the H, THEM, and OF
Some function words reduce by dropping the first sound. This applies to function words that begin with H that are pronouns (him, her, his, he), function words that begin with H that are helping verbs (have, has, had), and the word them.


The words `them` and `him` will sound the same in reduction, both reducing to [əm]:
- I made him a card. [aɪˈmeɪd‿әm_әˈkɑɹd]
- I made them a card. [aɪˈmeɪd‿әm_әˈkɑɹd]

The words `have` and `of` also sound the same when reduced. With should, would, and could, the following word is always have.

When you drop a beginning sound, make sure to link that word to the word before. It should just sound like an extra syllable at the end of that word.

### [V10.10 — Dropping the H Reduction](engl.io/a1x)
- tell her [tɛl‿ər]
- was he there? [wʌ‿zi_ðɛәɹ]
- don't link sounds over punctuations: `.,:;-`
- link function words, not main verbs
- what have you done? [wʌ‿dəv_jʊ_dʌn]
- my friend has seen it twice[maɪ_frɛn‿dəz_si‿nɪt|‿twaɪs]
- What was his name again?[wʌt|_wəz‿ɪz_neɪm_əˈgɛn]
- I told him no [aɪ_ˈtoʊld‿ɪm_noʊ]

RECAP:  Function words are usually unstressed, and often unstressed words are reduced (reduced:  a sound is dropped or is changed to another vowel, like AA changing to UH).  Reduced words that begin with H are often pronounced:  1)  with no H sound  2)  linked to the word before  Example:  Was he there?  Words that begin with H that often reduced and link this way:  hi, her, his, him; have, had has (when they are helping verbs and not the main verb).

### [V10.11 — I have a Cold](engl.io/a1z)
dropped H. The difference between ‘cold’ and ‘code’ is the Dark L!
- I have a cold ~> DA-da-da-DA ~> [aɪ‿æv‿ə_koʊld]

### [V10.12 — I have to Go](engl.io/a21)
dropped H
- I have to Go ~> da-Da-da-DA ~> [aɪ_ˌæf_tə_ˈgoʊ]

### [V10.13 — THEM Reduction](engl.io/a23)
- by itself them[ðɛm]
- as part of sentence: [ðəm], short and flat
- general speaking: [əm]
  - I'll take them with me -> [teɪk‿əm]
  - I'll get them later -> [gɛd‿əm]
  - I gave them to you last night -> [geɪv‿əm]
  - You can have them -> [hæv‿əm]
  - We can buy them later -> [baɪ‿əm]

### [V10.14 — OF Reduction](engl.io/a27)
- normal: [ʌv]
- reduced: [əv]+vowel or [ə]+consonant
- [əv]
  - A lot of offices[ə_lɑd‿əv‿ˈɔ-fɪs-ɪz]
  - one of the[wʌn‿ə‿ðə]
- [ə]
  - one of my [wʌn‿ə‿maɪ]
  - part of a [pɑrd‿əv‿ə]
- of them: [əv‿əm] or [ə‿ðəm]

### [A10.5 — Dropping the H](engl.io/a2b)
- him: tell him [tεl‿əm]
- have: would have [wʊd‿әv]
- his: on his [ɔn‿ɪz]
- her: by her [baɪ‿әɹ] (sounds just like ‘buyer’!)

### [A10.6 — THEM](engl.io/a2e)
- gave them [geɪv‿әm]
- need them [nid‿әm]

### [A10.7 — OF](engl.io/a2g)
- sort of [sɔɹd‿əv]
- sort of [sɔɹd‿ә]
- kind of [kaɪnd‿әv]
- kind of [kaɪnd‿ə]

## CAN
- CAN fully pronounced: [kæn]; reduced [kən]

### [V10.15 — CAN Reduction](engl.io/a2i)
- when reduced, can is very fast, lower in pitch, linked to the words around it.
- I can bring food [aɪ‿kən_brɪŋ_fud]
- we can stay [wi‿kən_steɪ]
- She can come with us [ʃi‿kən_kʌm_wɪð_ʌs]
- You can have my ticket [jʊ‿kən_həv_maɪ_ˈtɪkət]
- Put it in the garbage can. [ˈgɑrbɪʤ_kæn]

### [A10.8 — CAN](engl.io/a2k)
- I can be there. [aɪ‿kәn_bi_ðεәɹ]
- We can try. [wi‿kən_tɹaɪ] (‘We can’ sounds like ‘weaken’!)

## TO, YOU, DO, and DOES
### TO fully pronounced: [tu]; reduced [tə] or [də]
- The T can be a True T[t] or a Flap T[d]. - If you don’t want to bother with thinking about the T, just always make a True T[t]. - Use the Flap T[t] when the sound before is voiced, like in “I’m running to the store” or “I’m taking Anna to the party.”

### [V10.15 — TO Reduction](engl.io/a2n)
I’ve decided you can use the flap T in the word ‘to’ any time except when the word ‘to’ follows a word that ends in a T. 
- we went to dinner [wi wɛnt| tə ˈdɪnər]
- come to my party [kʌm də maɪ ˈpɑrti]
- let's go to the store [lɛts goʊ də ðə stɔr]
- I wanted to get more [aɪ ˈwɑn-ɪd|‿də gɛt mɔr]
- I thought to myself [aɪ θɔt|‿tə ˌmaɪˈsɛlf]
- We're going to your play [wir ˈgoʊɪŋ də jər pleɪ]

*TODO: PRACTICE, rapasar [ə]*

### [A10.9 — TO](engl.io/a2p)
- going to [ˈgoʊ ɪŋ tә] (this can reduce further to ‘gonna’ - you’ll learn more about that soon), 
- I’m going to be late. [aɪm ˈgoʊ ɪŋ tә bi leɪt|]
- about to [әˈbaʊt| tә],
- I’m about to leave. [aɪm әˈbaʊt| tə liv]
- it to [ɪt| tә], 
- Give it to my assistant. [gɪ‿vɪt| tә maɪ‿jәˈsɪs tәnt|]
- I'll be good to see you
- good to [gʊd tә]

### DO and DOES
- `DO` fully pronounced: [du]; reduced [də]
- `DOES` fully pronounced: [dʌz]; reduced [dәz]

- The words do and does can be reduced in a question. For example, “Do you want to go?”, “Does she know?”
- Exception: ‘Do’ is not reduced in questions if it is the main verb. For example, “What does she do?”
- In a statement, ‘do’ or ‘does’ can be the main verb or added for emphasis. This means we want to stress it, not reduce it: "I do want to know." "She does odd jobs for us."

### [V10.18 — DO and DOES Reduction](engl.io/a2v)
- DO
  - main verb [du]: I do it all the time.
  - auxiliary verb [də]: What do you think? [wʌ‿də‿jə]
- DOES
  - main verb [dʌz]: She does accounting for the firm.
  - auxiliary verb [dәz]: What does he need? [wʌ‿dəz‿i]

### [A10.10 — DO and DOES](engl.io/a2w)
- do: do you [də jә], Do you want to go? [dә jә ˈwʌn ә goʊ]
- does: does she [dәz ʃi], Does she know? [dәz ʃi noʊ]

## A, AN, and AND
- A fully pronounced: [eɪ]; reduced [ә]
- AN fully pronounced: [æn]; reduced [ən]
- AND fully pronounced: [ænd]; reduced [әn]

### [V10.19 — AND Reduction](engl.io/a32)
reduced [æn] [әn] [n] 
- Monday and tuesday [ˈmʌn-deɪ‿n‿ˈtuz-deɪ]
- this one and that one [ðɪs_wʌn‿ən‿ðæt|_wʌn]
- and now it's over [æn‿naʊ_ɪts_ˈoʊvər]

### [A10.11 — AND](engl.io/a34)
- And, cold and, cold and windy [koʊld‿әn_ˈwɪn-di], It’s cold and windy.
- and, cats and, cats and dogs [kæts‿ən_dɔgz], It’s raining cats and dogs.
- and, Peter and, Peter and Kelly [ˈpi-dәɹ‿ən_ˈkεl-i], Peter and Kelly are moving in.

## THE
- fully pronounced: [ði], reduced: [ði] or [ðə]
- the + consonant: [ðә] “the last”, “the best”
- the + vowel or diphthong: [ði]. “the olives”, “the other”

### [V10.20 — How to Pronounce THE](engl.io/a37)
- [ðә]: the best, the last, the one
- [ði]: the old, the elevator, the honorable

spoken very quickly and lined to the next word

### [A10.12 — THE](engl.io/a38)
- the [ði], the other [ði‿ˈjʌʒ-әɹ], the earth [ði‿jɜɹθ]
- the [ðә], the best [ðə‿bεst], the worst [ðә‿wɜɹst]

## AS, WAS, and BECAUSE
- AS fully pronounced: [æz]; reduced [əz]
- WAS fully pronounced: [wʌz]; reduced [wəz]
- BECAUSE fully pronounced: [bɪˈkɔz]; reduced [bɪˈkәz] or [kəz]

All of these words reduce to end in a very quick [əz]. 

### [V10.21 — BECAUSE Reduction](engl.io/a3c)
[bɪˈkɔz] or [bɪˈkʌz]. The las sound is a Z sound, so it does need to be voiced.

in spoken English, it’s certainly acceptable to reduce the word ‘because’ to ‘cuz’[kəz] in everyday conversation.
Make sure to take that final Z sound and link it up to the next word.
- because I [bɪˈkәz‿aɪ] or [kәz‿aɪ]
- necause my [bɪˈkәz‿maɪ] or [kәz‿maɪ]

### [V10.22 — The AS and WAS Reductions](engl.io/a3e)
AS [əz]
- as long as [əzˈlɔŋ‿əz]
- not as if [ˈnɑd‿əz‿ɪf]
- as tall as [əzˈtɔl‿əz]

WAS [wəz]
- I was on [ˈaɪ_wəz‿ɑn]
- She was already [ˈʃi_wəz‿ɔlˈrɛdi]
- It was really good [ɪt|wəz ˈrɪli gʊd]
- He was there [ˈhi_wəzˈðɛr]

### [A10.13 — AS, WAS, BECAUSE](engl.io/a3g)
- as, as I [əz‿aɪ], as I thought.
- as, as good [әz_gʊd], You’re as good as her.
- was, was he [wәz‿i], Was he there?
- was, was good [wәz_gʊd], It was good.
- because, because I’m [bɪˈkәz‿aɪm], because I’m tired
- because, because they [bɪˈkәz_ðeɪ], because they live too far out of town.

## SHOULD, WOULD, and COULD
- SHOULD fully pronounced: [ʃʊd]; reduced [ʃәd] or [ʃә]
- COULD fully pronounced: [kʊd]; reduced [kәd] or [kә]
- WOULD fully pronounced: [wʊd]; reduced [wәd] or [wә]

Dropping the D only works when the next sound is a consonant, for example: “could we”, “should see”, “would John”. If the next sound is a vowel or diphthong, make a quick flap of the tongue for the D and connect the words.

### [V10.23 — Should, Would, and Could](engl.io/a3j)
- [ʃә]: should we call her?, I should go
- [ʃәd]: should I say that?
- [kә]: could we try later? 
- [kәd]: could I come back later? 
- [wә]: would we want to do that? 
- [wәd]: where would I go? 

### [A10.14 — SHOULD, WOULD, and COULD](engl.io/a3k)
- should, should I [ʃəd‿aɪ], should I try?
- should, should we [ʃə‿wi], should we leave?
- could, could I [kəd‿aɪ], could I try?
- would, would we [wə‿wi], would we be late?
- would, would he [wəd‿i], would he care?

### [TEST A10.15 — Is the Word Reduced?](engl.io/a3n)
p195 / a266
reduced y/n: 12/14 (for, to)
correct words : 12/14 (the/do, his/as)
