# AEP > Contractions
# 11 - Contractions
A contraction is when we take two words and condense them down into one: did not → didn’t.
They’re used in writing and speech, both professional and casual. Contractions allow us to smooth out speech and make some function words shorter.

**Content**  
[N’T Contractions](#nt-contractions)  
[Can vs. Can’t](#can-vs-cant)  
[TO BE and TO HAVE Contractions](#to-be-and-to-have-contractions)  
[LET’S Contraction](#lets-contraction)  
[Modal Verb Contractions](#modal-verb-contractions)  
[WILL Contractions](#will-contractions)  
[WOULD, HAD, and DID Contractions](#would-had-and-did-contractions)  
[Using Contractions and Reductions Together](#using-contractions-and-reductions-together)  
[When NOT to Use Contractions](#when-not-to-use-contractions)  

## N’T Contractions
The N’T sound is interesting: combine the nasality of the N with the stop of the T. The last syllable should feel really abrupt because of this stop quality. There is no release of the T.

### [V11.1 — N’T Contractions](engl.io/a41)
`n't`: nasal, stop abrupt, lower in pitch than the rest of the word.
- He shouldn’t be here

### [A11.1 — N’T Contractions](engl.io/a48)
- is not = isn’t [ˈɪz-әnt│]: Isn’t it nice?
- are not = aren’t [ɑɹnt│]: We aren’t late.
- was not = wasn’t [wʌz-әnt│]: It wasn’t bad.
- were not = weren’t [wɜɹnt│]: We weren’t there.
- have not = haven’t [ˈhæv-әnt│]: I haven’t seen it.
- has not = hasn’t [ˈhæz-әnt│]: He hasn’t seen it.
- had not = hadn’t [ˈhæd│әnt│]: We hadn’t heard that.
- will not = won’t [woʊnt│]: I won’t go.
- would not = wouldn’t [ˈwʊd│әnt│]: I wouldn’t say that.
- could not = couldn’t [ˈkʊd│әnt│]: I couldn’t see. 
- should not = shouldn’t [ˈʃʊd│әnt│]: I shouldn’t say this.
- do not = don’t [doʊnt│]: Don’t say that.
- does not = doesn’t [ˈdʌz-әnt│]: It doesn’t say. 
- did not = didn’t [ˈdɪd│әnt│]: We didn’t know.

## Can vs. Can’t
- CAN: unreduced [kæn], reduced [kәn]
- CAN'T: [kænt│]

### [V11.3 — CAN vs. CAN’T](engl.io/a4a)
- Can’t ends in a nasal n
- Often, can is reduced [kәn]. Can’t [kænt│] never reduces. The vowel sound is different
- Can’t[kænt│] is shorter and more abrupt than can[kæn] when can is not reduced and has a full vowel. In this case the vowel never change

### [A11.2 — Can vs. Can’t](engl.io/a4c)
- I can hear you, I can’t hear you.
- We can come, we can’t come
- I can come, I can’t come.
- They can leave, they can’t leave.

## TO BE and TO HAVE Contractions
These two sets of contractions go together because sometimes they make the same word.

For example:
- she is → she’s [ʃiz]
- she has → she’s [ʃiz]

Question words can use ‘does’:
- who is → who’s [huz]
- who has → who’s [huz]
- who does → who’s [huz]

Chart:
- I
  - I am = I’m [aɪm|әm] -> I’m late.
  - I have = I’ve [aɪv|әm] -> I’ve been there.
- you
  - you are = you’re [jʊәr], [jɔɹ], or [jәɹ] -> You’re late.
  - you have = you’ve [juv|jәv] -> You’ve been there.
- he
  - he is = he’s [hiz|iz] -> He’s late.
  - he has = he’s [hiz|iz] -> He’s been there.
- she
  - she is = she’s [ʃiz] -> She’s late.
  - she has = she’s [ʃiz] -> She’s been there.
- it
  - it is = it’s [ɪts|ts] -> It’s late.
  - it has = it’s [ɪts|ts] -> It’s got to be on time.
- noun
  - the dog is = the dog’s [ðә dɔgz] -> The dog’s hungry.
  - the dog has = the dog’s [ðә dɔgz] -> The dog’s been fed.
- proper noun
  - Mary is = Mary’s [ˈmεəɹ‿iz] -> Mary’s late.
  - Mary has = Mary’s [ˈmεəɹ‿iz] -> Mary’s been there.
- we
  - we are = we’re [wəɹ] -> We’re late.
  - we have = we’ve [wiv] -> We’ve been there.
- they
  - they are = they’re [ðεəɹ|ðәɹ] -> They’re late.
  - they have = they’ve [ðeɪv] -> They’ve been there
- plural noun*
  - the dogs are = the dogs’re [ðə_ˈdɔgz‿әɹ] -> The dogs’re hungry.
  - the dogs have = the dogs’ve [ðə_ˈdɔgz‿әv] -> The dogs’ve been fed.
- that
  - that is = that’s [ðæts|ðəts|ts] -> That’s okay.
  - that has = that’s [ðæts|ðәts|ts] -> That’s been a problem.
- who
  - who is = who’s [huz] -> Who’s late?
  - who are = who’re [ˈhu_әɹ] -> Who’re those people?
  - who has = who’s [huz] -> Who’s been there?
  - who have = who’ve [huv] -> The people who’ve left didn’t want to stay.
  - who does = who’s [huz] -> Who’s he like?
- what
  - what is = what’s[wʌts] -> What’s going on?
  - what are = what’re[ˈwʌt_әɹ] -> What’re you doing?
  - what has = what’s[wʌts] -> What’s been going on? 
  - what have = what’ve[ˈwʌt_əv] -> What’ve you been doing?
  - What does = what’s [wʌts] -> What’s he need?
- when
  - when is = when’s[wεnz] -> When’s it going to be over
  - when are = when’re[ˈwεn‿əɹ] -> When’re they arriving?
  - when has = when’s [wεnz] -> When has he seen it? 
  - when have = when’ve [ˈwεn_әv] -> When’ve you tried?
  - When does = when’s [wεnz] -> When’s he leaving?
- where
  - where is = where’s [wεəɹz] -> Where’s the bathroom?
  - where are = where’re [wεəɹ‿əɹ]-> Where’re you going?
  - where has = where’s [wεəɹz] -> Where’s she been?
  - where have = where’ve [wεəɹ_әv]-> Where’ve you been?
  - Where does = where’s [wεəɹz] -> Where’s he keep it?
- why
  - why is = why’s [waɪz] -> Why’s he leaving? 
  - why are = why’re -> Why’re you crying?
  - why has = why’s [waɪz] -> Why’s he given up? 
  - why have = why’ve -> Why’ve they stopped coming?
  - why does = why’s [waɪz] -> Why’s he need it?
- how
  - how is = how’s [haʊz] -> How’s it going?
  - how are = how’re -> How’re things?
  - how has = how’s [haʊz] -> How’s it been going? 
  - how have = how’ve -> How’ve they already finished?
  - how does = how’s [haʊz] -> How’s that sound?

Three things to note about these contractions:
1. Some contractions are the same.
2. *The plural noun contractions aren’t really contractions
3. It’s = it is, which is different from “its”(shows possession)

### [V11.4 — TO BE Contractions](engl.io/a4e)
- `'s` is voice[z] or unvoiced[s] based on previous sound
- all set: ready
- I am crushing it: doing an excellent job
- I have a crush with someone: I have romantic interest
- my dogs are barking: your feet are tired

### [V11.5 — I’m Coming](engl.io/a4g)
- I'm coming: da-DA-da [aɪm_ˈkʌm_ɪŋ]

### [V11.6 — YOU’RE Contraction](engl.io/a1k)
Your[jɔɹ], You're[jʊəɹ,joʊɹ] => contraction [jəɹ]: 
- `J` tongue tip touch teeth, front part of the tongue is touching the roof of the mouth 
- `R`, the tongue will also touch the roof of the  mouth, but it’s further back. 
- don’t need much jaw drop for either of these sounds

### [V11.7 — Interview a Broadcaster: Erica Hill](engl.io/a4m)

### [V11.8 — That’s / It’s / What’s Reduction](engl.io/a4p)
- it is -> it’s -> [ts]
- what is -> what's -> [ts]: What's his name again?[ts‿ɪz_neɪm_əˈgɛn], What's up?[ts‿ʌp]
- that is -> that's -> [ts]: That's nice [ts‿naɪs]

Unless you have a very minimal accent, it’s probably best to pronounce the contraction: that’s, it’s, what’s.

### [A11.3 — TO BE and TO HAVE Contractions](engl.io/a4s)
- I’m [aɪm] — I’m sorry.
- I’ve [aɪv] — I’ve been there.
- You’re [jʊәr] — You’re right.
- You’ve [juv] — You’ve seen it?
- He’s [hiz] — He’s okay. [he is]
- We’re [wəɹ] — We’re going.
- We’ve [wiv] — We’ve tried.
- They’re [ðεəɹ] — They’re great.
- They’ve [ðeɪv] — They’ve known a while.
- Who’s [huz] — Who’s there? [who is]
- What’s [wʌts] — What’s it say? [what does]
- When’s [wεnz] — When’s it been better? [when has] 
- Where’s [wεəɹz] — Where’s the report? [where is] 
- Why’s [waɪz] — Why’s she here? [why is]
- How’s [haʊz] — How’s it going? [how is]

## LET’S Contraction
Let us = let’s [lɛts]. This contraction is unique because, unlike the others, we generally don’t use it in its two-word form: Let’s try again. Let’s go. Let’s wait and see.

## Modal Verb Contractions
have: would’ve, should’ve, could’ve, might’ve, must’ve.
Pronunciation
1. reduce have to [әv]: A11.4, A11.5
2. reduce them further by dropping the V sound [ә]: V11.9

### [A11.4 — Modal Verb Contractions](engl.io/a4u)
- would’ve [ˈwʊ‿dәv]: I would’ve been there
- should’ve [ˈʃʊ‿dәv]: I should’ve left.
- could’ve [ˈkʊ‿dәv]: You could’ve gotten hurt.
- might’ve [ˈmaɪ‿dәv]: That might’ve been better. 
- must’ve [ˈmʌs‿tәv]: That must’ve been hard.

### [A11.5 — Modal Verb Contractions, Slow Motion](engl.io/a4w)
- would’ve [ˈwʊ‿dәv]
- should’ve [ˈʃʊ‿dәv]
- could’ve [ˈkʊ‿dәv]
- might’ve [ˈmaɪ‿dәv]
- must’ve [ˈmʌs‿tәv]

### [V11.9 — Shoulda, Woulda, Coulda](engl.io/a4y)
These reductions sound like natural American English
- should have [ˈʃʊd-ә]
- should not have (shouldna) [ˈʃʊd-әn-ә]: It shouldn’t have started already.
- would have [ˈwʊd-ә]
- would not have (wouldna) [ˈwʊd-әn-ә]: It wouldn’t have mattered.
- could have [ˈkʊd-ә]
- could not have (couldna) [ˈkʊd-әn-ә]: You couldn't have known.

## WILL Contractions
For pronunciation, just add a Dark L to the end.
it’s much more common to reduce I’ll to make it shorter. Then it sounds like the word ‘all’ [ɔl], or even ‘all’ reduced, [əl].
It’ll [ɪd‿әl], what’ll [wʌd‿әl], and that’ll [ðæd‿el] are interesting because the final T changes to a Flap T.

### [V11.10 — We’ll see](engl.io/a51)
We’ll see: da-DA [wәlˈsi]
- `wәl` (WULL): 
  - w: lips are in a tight circle, hold-then-release the air in throat
  - dark part from dark l: lips will relax out of the circle, tongue tip, which was touching the back of the bottom front teeth for the W, stays there. The back part of the tongue stretches back a bit, making that dark sound. 
- `si`
  - s: teeth come together, and the corners of the lips might pull a little wide. The tongue tip still hasn’t moved, touching the back of the bottom front teeth. It presses there for the S. 
  - i: Tongue tip stays where it is, the teeth part a bit, and the front part of the tongue reaches towards the roof of the mouth.

### [V11.11 — I’ll think about it](engl.io/a53)
I'll think about it: da-DA-da-da-da [əl‿ˈθɪŋk‿əˈbaʊd‿ɪt|]
- link togheter smoothly
- I'll [aɪl], reduced to [əl], one sound, in casual conversation: dark sound of the dark L. Tongue tip touching the back of the bottom front teeth, and the back part is pulling back a little bit. 
- think[θɪŋk]: stressed word
  - [θ]: tongue and jaw will come up enough so your tongue tip can be lightly touching both the bottom and top teeth. The tip will come out just a little bit.
  - [ɪ]: I tend to make the IH more of an EE sound when it’s followed by the NG consonant. Tongue tip does go back down, front part of the tongue stays  close to the roof of the mouth
  - [ŋ]: Then the middle-back part of the tongue goes to the soft palate
  - [k]: your soft palate raises, it closes. Release the k into the next sound
- about[əˈbaʊd]
  - [ə]: no jaw drop, as quickly as possible
  - [b]: lips come together 
  - [aʊ]: It’s not stressed, so we don’t need too much jaw drop. The lips will probably round a little, but not too much. We want to move on to the next sound as quickly as possible.
  - [d]: Flap T. Tongue will just bounce against the roof of the mouth without stopping the flow of air. This will help us link to the next word.
- it[ɪt|]
  - [ɪ]: You don’t need to think about making the IH really, it will happen quickly when you bring your tongue down from the Flap
  - [t|]: cut off the airflow from throat, make it abrupt

### [A11.6 — ‘LL Contractions](engl.io/a56)
> Focus on the back of the tongue making the Dark L sound. Make sure you’re still saying the contraction in the sentence, and not pronouncing both words.

- I’ll — I’ll see you later.
- You’ll — you’ll see.
- He’ll — He’ll be here.
- She’ll — She’ll try.
- It’ll — It’ll be great.
- Mary’ll — Mary’ll be there.
- We’ll — We’ll see.
- They’ll — They’ll be okay.
- The dogs’ll — The dogs’ll be hungry.
- That’ll — That’ll be nice.
- Who’ll — Who’ll be there?
- What’ll — What’ll they say?
- Where’ll — Where’ll it be?
- When’ll — When’ll you know?
- Why’ll — Why’ll they think that?
- How’ll — How’ll you get home?

### [A11.7 — ‘LL Contractions](engl.io/a58)
> Notice the shape of the voice. The Dark L sound happens on the downward movement of pitch, the curve down.
- I’ll
- You’ll
- He’ll
- She’ll
- It’ll
- Mary’ll
- We’ll
- They’ll
- Dogs’ll
- That’ll
- Who’ll
- What’ll
- Where’ll
- When’ll
- Why’ll
- How’ll

## WOULD, HAD, and DID Contractions
Even though the different contractions sound the same, people will know your meaning from the context.
These contractions, except for the question word contractions, will be unstressed in sentences. That means you want to say them quickly.

- I
  - I would = I’d[aɪd|әd] -> I’d like that.
  - I had = I’d[aɪd|әd] -> I’d seen it already.
- you
  - you would = you’d [jud|jәd] -> You’d like it.
  - you had = you’d [jud|jәd] -> You’d already done it.
- he
  - he would = he’d [hid|id] -> He’d like it.
  - he had = he’d [hid|id] -> He’d already done it.
- she
  - she would = she’d [ʃid|ʃәd] -> She’d like it.
  - she had = she’d [ʃid|ʃәd] -> She’d already been there.
- it
  - it would = it’d [ɪd‿әd] -> It’d seem like it.
  - it had = it’d [ɪd‿әd] -> It’d already ended.
- noun
  - the dog would = the dog’d [ðә‿ˈdɔg‿әd] -> The dog’d. The dog’d get sick.
  - the dog had = the dog’d [ðә‿ˈdɔg‿әd] -> The dog’d been sick for a week.
- proper noun
  - Mary would = Mary’d [ˈmεәɹ-id] -> Mary’d like it.
  - Mary had = Mary’d [ˈmεәɹ-id] -> Mary’d already been there.
- we
  - we would = we’d [wid|wәd] -> We’d like to see it.
  - We had = we’d [wid|wәd] -> We’d seen it before.
- they
  - they would = they’d [ðeɪd] -> They’d like to see it.
  - they had = they’d [ðeɪd] -> they’d seen it before
- plural noun
  - the dogs would = dogs’d [ˈdɔg-zәd] -> The dogs’d like to be walked.
  - the dogs had = dogs’d [ˈdɔg-zәd] -> The dogs’d been walked already.
- that
  - that would = that’d [ˈðæd-әd] -> That’d be nice.
  - that had = that’d [ˈðæd-әd] -> That’d been over for an hour.
- who
  - who would = who’d [hud] -> Who’d like to see it?
  - who had = who’d [hud] -> Who’d already seen it?
  - who did = who’d [hud] -> Who’d he like?
- what
  - what would = what’d [ˈwʌd-әd] -> *we don’t actually use this contraction in speech
  - what had = what’d [ˈwʌd‿әd] -> I thought what’d been said was the truth.
  - what did = what’d [ˈwʌd‿ɪd|wʌd] -> What’d you think?
- when
  - when would = when’d [wεnd] -> When’d you like it by?
  - when had = when’d [wεnd] -> When’d he seen it?
  - when did = when’d [wεnd] -> When’d she leave?
- where
  - where would = where’d [wεәɹd] -> Where’d you like it?
  - where had = where’d [wεәɹd] -> Where’d he seen it?
  - where did = where’d [wεәɹd] -> Where’d they go?
- why
  - why would = why’d [waɪd] -> Why’d I lie?
  - why had = why’d [waɪd] -> Why’d he been there?
  - why did = why’d [waɪd] -> Why’d they leave?
- how
  - how would = how’d [haʊd] -> How’d you like that?
  - how had = how’d [haʊd] -> How’d he already known?
  - how did = how’d [haʊd] -> How’d she know?

### [V11.12 — WHAT DID Reduction](engl.io/a5a)
- what did [ˈwʌt-dɪd]: you’ll never hear it pronounced that clearly by a native speaker. Instead [ˈwʌt|-dɪd] or must common [ˈwʌ‿dɪd]
  - `wʌ`: lips round into a tight circle for `w`, and then everything relaxes for `ʌ`
  - `dɪd`: To make the flap sound, the top front part of the tongue bounces against the roof of the mouth. `ɪ` can be very fast, lower energy. Then the tongue goes back to the roof of the mouth for the second `d`
- what’d [ˈwʌd‿ɪd|wʌd]
  - what did he [ˈwʌd‿i]: drop the h sound
  - what did you [ˈwʌdʒ‿ә]: 
    - what did you do?[ˈwʌdʒ‿әˈdu]
    - What did I do?[ˈwʌd‿aɪˈdu]
    - What did you say?[ˈwʌdʒ‿әˈseɪ]
    - What did she say?[ˈwʌd-ʃi‿ˈseɪ]
    - What did it say?[ˈwʌd‿ɪt|ˈseɪ]
    - What did she want?[ˈwʌd-ʃiˈwɑnt|]
    - What did they want?[ˈwʌd-ðeɪˈwɑnt|]
    - what did we do?[ˈwʌd-wiˈdu]
    - What did he need?[ˈwʌd‿iˈnid]
    - What did they need?[ˈwʌd-ðeɪˈnid]

### [V11.13 — Contractions](engl.io/a5c)
#### TO BE and TO HAVE Contractions
- most of them in previous examples
- could have -> could've [ˈkʊ‿dəv]
- should have -> should've [ˈʃʊ‿dəv]
- would have -> would've [ˈwʊ‿dəv]
- might have -> might've [ˈmaɪ‿dəv]

#### WILL Contractions
All of these contractions have a `dark L` that is added at the end.
- I will -> I'll [aɪl]
- you will -> you'll [jul]
- he will -> he'll [hɪl]
- she will -> she'll [ʃɪl]
- it will -> it'll [ˈɪd-әl]
- we will -> we'll [wɪl]
- they will -> they'll [ðeɪl]
- how will -> how'll [haʊl]
- where will -> where'll [wεəɹl]
- when will -> when'll [ˈwε‿nәl]
- what will -> what'll [ˈwʌ‿dәl]

#### HAD and WOULD -> 'd
- I had|would-> I'd [aɪd]
- you had|would -> you’d [jud]
- she/he had|would -> she'd/he'd [ʃid/hid]
- it had|would -> it'd [ˈɪ‿dәd]
- we had|would -> we'd [wid] {weed}
- they had|would -> they'd[ðeɪd]
- how had|would -> how'd[haʊd]

#### DID -> 'd
- where did -> where'd[wεәɹd]
- why did -> why'd[waɪd] {wide}

### [A11.8 — WOULD, HAD, and DID Reductions](engl.io/a5f)
- I’d — I’d already left. [I had]
- You’d — You’d like it. [you would]
- He’d — He’d already done it. [he had]
- We’d — We’d like it. [we would]
- They’d — They’d be okay. [they would]
- Who’d — Who’d think that? [who would]
- When’d — When’d he leave? [when did]
- Where’d — Where’d she go? [where did]
- Why’d — Why’d she say that? [why did]
- How’d — How’d he know? [how did]

### [V11.14 — Pronunciation of WH Words](engl.io/a5h)
- old fashion [hw]: why learn another sound, hw, when you don’t have to. Just make it a nice, clean W sound.

## Using Contractions and Reductions Together
we want: short, linked together function words.
- wouldn’t have [ˈwʊd-әn‿әv] or [ˈwʊd-әn‿ә]
- didn’t her [ˈdɪd-әn‿әɹ]

### [A11.9 — Contractions with Reductions](engl.io/a5k)
Think of the contraction and reduction all as being one word, flowing together without breaks. Try not to think of saying the words, but just of imitating what you hear. Don’t think of it as English, but just sounds and melodies to imitate.
- wouldn’t have [ˈwʊd‿әn‿ev], I wouldn’t have said that.
- didn’t her [dɪd‿әn‿әɹ], Didn’t her team win?

### [A11.10 — What contraction are you hearing?](engl.io/a5m)
Scores (Q: p213 - A: p267)
1. 13/15 (train: he'll, we're, where'll)

## When NOT to Use Contractions
For emphasis and clarity.

I do encourage you, especially in speaking, to use them frequently to increase the contrast between stressed and unstressed words. 
As you listen to the radio, podcasts, or watch TV, write down every contraction you hear. You’ll notice you’re writing down a lot! If you never used contractions, your speech wouldn’t sound natural at all.

### Contractversation
If you pronounce everything fully and clearly (no contractions, no reductions, and only True T pronunciations),  it can end up sounding very formal, sometimes even robotic, not at all natural.

Contractions and reductions go a long way in making you sound more American

contraction vs not contraction example
- V11.15:
  - Rachel, I have not seen you in weeks.
  - Rach, I haven’t seen you in weeks.
- V11.16:
  - We are out of Bananas and Milk
  - We’re out of Bananas and Milk.
- V11.17:
  - What movie do you want to watch?
  - What movie do you wanna watch?
