# Week 1 - What is Creativity?

Syllabus:
- Your Creative Brain is a muscle: Use it!
- Definition of creativity;
- First encounter with the ZiZoZi (zoom in, zoom out, zoom in) methods;
- Creativity self-test;
- “Discover” and “Delivery” self-test;
- The imagination elevator;
- ZiZoZi in action;
- How to build your creativity ‘muscles’.

## Intro Video
So there are two parts to creativity. The first is discovery. Discovering new ideas, new products, new services, new everything, new and better ways to do everything.
The second part of creativity is delivery, implementing our new ideas, using proven tools and methods of business and management.

The creative journey begins with a look deep inside each of us, deep inside yourself. What are you passionate about, what are you good at? What do you really, really love to do? 

> creativity is finding what you love to do when you're playing, and then use that to become your work and to make your living. 

Discovery is generating novel and useful ideas, that satisfy unmet needs. That last part is very important.
Before you start any project, you always ask, how will we know, at the end of it, if we've succeeded?

[*] Todo: "Cracking the Creativity Code" in meetup

## What is Creativity?

[Cracking the Creativity Code - Week One.pdf](./resources/w1_cracking-the-creativity-code.pdf)

Creativity is an acquired skill, one that improves with practice. The more you practice discovering ideas and implementing them, the better you become at it.

Creativity changes the world and enriches people’s lives. To do so takes two different skills.
The first is “discovery” -- discovering new ideas, new products, new services, new and better ways to do everything.
The second is “delivery” – implementing new ideas, using the proven tools and methods of 
business and management.

How to do more with less?

**Discovery** - generating novel and useful ideas that satisfy unmet needs
**Delivery** - implementing creative ideas in a sustained manner for the benefit of the largest number of people possible

## Definition of creativity
the very first step in becoming more creative is to break the chains of habit and to explore new things, new foods, new clothing, new music, new friends, new experiences. Warren Buffett once said that the chains of habit are too light to be felt until they become too heavy to be broken. Explore your uncomfortable zones. 
Practice being uncomfortable. So that when you develop new ideas, you overcome that discomfort barrier. 

[Video Ted Talk Sir Kenneth Robinson - Do schools kill creativity?](http://youtu.be/iG9CE55wbtY)

Robinson basically says that our schools give us a very strange paradoxical message, so do our big companies. I expect all of you to be independent, innovative, critical thinkers, who will do exactly as I say. 

Creativity exercises, actually change physiologically our brain, in ways that are highly desirable (Book: The Brain That Changes Itself). 

How can I my brain to come up with ideas that maybe use fewer resources to create more fruitful, more enriched, more happy, more full lives for people everywhere through time?

## A first encounter with the ZiZoZi method
The zoom in zoom out method for developing and discovering creative ideas, is built on a very important premise. We call this discovering ideas, not creating ideas. We believe that for every dilemma, for every human need, there is indeed a solution. 
If you believe there is such a solution then you're far more motivated to discover it. 
The problem isn't that we aim too high and fail. It's just the opposite. We aim too low and we succeed. Aim high. Tackle really hard problems. 
Creativity starts with passion and motivation. Creativity starts with why. 

These are the so-called da Vinci power questions from a wonderful book called How to Think Like da Vinci, how to create like da Vinci. Da Vinci’s 8 Power Questions:
- When am I most ‘myself’?
- What is the ONE THING I could do, or stop doing, that would most improve the quality of my life?
- What is my greatest talent?
- How can I get paid for doing what I love best?
- Who are my most inspiring role models?
- How can I change the world?
- What is my deepest passion?
- What will be my life’s legacy?

A tool I found very useful, and made use of quite often, is something called [Start with Why by Simon Sinek](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4ZoJKF_VuA): creativity starts with why. 

Discovering creative ideas begins with why, and for whom.

## Test your creativity: Torrance Creativity Test
when I've done this course how will I know if I succeeded?
How will I know if it was worthwhile? 
Test it now and then test it after you've done the course and the final project to see if we really have made a difference in your creative juices. And to do this, we suggest that you take the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking.

[Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking- Figural and Verbal Demonstrator](./resources/w1_torrance-test.pdf)

## Self-test your ‘discovery’ and ‘delivery’ skills
Creativity is a journey inward, discovering who you really are. Becoming yourself as part of a process to generate wonderful world changing new ideas.

[Skill test- Discovery vs. Delivery](./resources/w1_discovery-vs-delivery.pdf)

measure your discovery skills, and your delivery skills. The reason for this is that if you're good at discovering new ideas, and less interested in making them happen delivering. Then you need to find partners who are really good at the delivery part.
We need to balance those two things. And again, we recall da Vinci who had all those great ideas, but very little success with delivery. By the way, that was partly purposeful.

So let me share with you this brief discovery and delivery quiz. It comes from a book by Dyer, Gregerson and Christensen called The Innovator's Dilemma. And there are 20 questions. We're asking you to read each of these 20 items and to score yourself honestly and carefully. 

## The Imagination Elevator – a story you won’t believe
You find creative breakthroughs to problems by cultivating wild ideas, by gathering those wild ideas. Incidentally, as you develop those ideas, you never, never ever shoot an idea down. You simply collect them and put them in your shopping cart.

This is the zoom in, zoom out approach. Zoom in, understand every detail of your problem or the need that you're trying to meet, everything. The science, the technology, the human aspect, everything. Then zoom out, zoom up to the 989th floor, collect wild ideas. And then come back down to the ground again. And then sift through the ideas and come up with one or a combination of ideas that you think will work and that will solve your problem. 

## Widening the range of choices – the Zoom in/Zoom out/Zoom in framework
For the most part, you have to earn the Eureka moments. You have to earn them by deep understanding of the problem and hard work. And some travels, imaginary or mental travels, or physical travels, gathering different approaches and solutions and then putting them all together.

10 Skills You Need Now: 
- Trans-disciplinarity
- Sense-making
- Design mindset
- New media literacy
- Virtual collaboration
- Novel thinking
- Cross-culture competency
- Social Cognitive intelligence
- Load mgemnt
- Computational thinking

People will laugh at you if the idea is unusual, weird, uncomfortable, strange, unfamiliar. That's a good sign, that's a sign you're on the right track.

## ZiZoZi in action: Stories to inspire & aspire
Creativity Can be risky. You can fail when you try to widen the range of choice. Creativity, innovation, it is not a science it's an art. But there's another upside to the downside and that is that there really is no such thing as failure in creating new ideas, because even if the ideas don't catch, you still learn a great deal. And the failure becomes a foundation for future successes.