# Module 1 - Communicate in Person: The Power of Face to Face Connections

- Review professional conversational vocabulary
- Produce proper word stress and intonation in your speaking
- Prepare and present a short "Elevator Speech"

## Small Talk and Conversational Vocabulary
What is Smalltalk?:
- Casual conversations before an event
- Friendly conversations between strangers
- Short conversations about everyday topics

### Tips
- Introduction: introduce yourself first. Once you've heard the other person's name, say it.
- Make a connection and ask some questions: "This is great event, isn't it?, What brings you here?", "What kind of work do you do?". Now that you've made a connection, **listen**. 

How do you smalltalk?
- Introduce yourself
- Ask questions
- Be a good listener
- Show your interest
- Find out what you and the other person have in common
- Think of ways to extend the conversation

[small talk conversation starters](https://www.englishclub.com/speaking/small-talk_conversation-starters.htm)

## Pronunciation

### Key Pronunciation: Stress & Intonation

Stress **1 syllable** in every word:
- Loudly
- Higher
- Longer

Sentence stress gives english its rhythm and beat.
When we say a sentence, some words are strong, and others are weak.
The last word is strongest and longest. Rhythm = weak + strong .
"He **bought** some **jeans**"  
"He **bought** a **pair** of **jeans**"  
"**Jhon** **bought** **two** **pairs** of **jeans**"

**Content Words (Meaning)**  
The important words (verb, nouns) are stressed (longer, lauder, have a beat). If you take them out, the sentence will make no sense.
- Action verbs(teach, talk, sing)
- Nouns (name, computer, Atlanta)
- Adjectives (green, big, interesting)
- Adverbs (quickly, loudly, never)
- WH questions words (who, what, where, how)
- Negatives (no, not, don't, can't)

**Structure Words**  
Are the words that we don't stress (shorter and softer). We use them to construct our sentences. If you remove them, the sentence will still make sense.
- prepositions (in, on ,at)
- pronouns (it, she, he, you)
- articles (a, an, the)
- modals (can, should, would)
- helping verbs (be, do, have)

**Intonation**: It's the way your voice riseswhen you ask a question that gets yes or not for an answer.
- "Do you have the **letter**?" -"**Yes**, I do"
- "Did you make the **call**?" -"**No**, I didn't"

Intonation is also the way your voice rises and fall when you make a statement or ask an information question.
"Winter weather in Berlin is cold and **huMId**".  
"What's the weather like in **yoUR COuntry**"  
Rising falling intotation tells your listener that you're finished.

> The best way to improve these skills is to listen and practice.

### Practice Word Stress
There are Practice materials included here. You may also enjoy practicing on the website: [rachelsenglish](rachelsenglish.com).

A very important part of learning English is understanding stress and using it correctly. If you want to learn how to speak English well, you need to learn the basic rules of stress and then apply them in your speech.

What is stress? Stress falls on only one syllable of a word with two or more syllables. When we emphasize a syllable, it is usually louder, the vowel sound is longer, and the pitch (tone) is higher.

EXERCISE: Pronounce each word and mark the vowel of the syllable that receives stress. Use an [audio dictionary](http://www.learnersdictionary.com/) to listen to pronunciation. Compare your answer to the stress marked in the dictionary

### Practice Sentence Stress
Examples

### Practice Intonation
Examples

## Elevator Speech

### The Elevator Speech
In today's business world, the elevator speech has become the way to both introduce yourself and make the other person want to talk more with you, and remember you in a positive way.

#### Good Elevator Speech
- Tell a story about you
- Give facts about you
- Show why you are important to them
- End with an opportunity to meet again.

Important
- Rhythm and Intonation
- Speed (How Fast?): Slowly
- Volume (How loud?): Change your volume and voide energy
- Use pauses: Highlight important information
- Body Language: 
  - Confident
  - Enthusiastic
  - Friendly
  - Knowledgeable
  - Organized

Make eye contact: I'm talking about you. I'm talking to you
Stand tall
Add hand gestures
Look natural

#### Successful Elevator Speech
- Told a story
- Made listener want to learn more
- Led to a future encounter/meeting
- Easy to understand
- Friendly, energetic, and natural

### Additional Resources
Article: [6 Tips for Perfecting Your Elevator Pitch](https://www.entrepreneur.com/slideshow/300359)

This website by ESL Gold has a collection of some videos to help you with our Elevator Speech:
http://eslgold.com/business/elevator_pitch

Here's another video with some good examples:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LDpe9StfGTA