# Ch03 Cryptography and Technical Foundations

Cryptography provides various security services, such as Confidentiality, Integrity, Authentication, (Entity Authentication and Data origin authentication) and non-repudiation.

Before discussing cryptography further, there are some mathematical terms and concepts that need to be explained first in order to fully understand the material provided later in this chapter.

## Mathematics

- set: collection of distinct objects
- group: closed and associated with an identity element defined.
- field: set that contains both additive and multiplicative groups (distributive).
- finite field: finite set of elements (Galois), used to produce accurate and error-free results of arithmetic operations: prime finite fields are used in elliptic curve cryptography to construct discrete logarithm problem.
- order: number of elements, cardinality
- prime fields: finite field with a prime number of elements: e and -e.
- ring: abelian group with more than one operation and closure, associative and distributive properties
- cyclic group: generated by a single element (group generator).
- abelian group: when the operation on the elements of a set is commutative: AxB = BxA
- modular arithmetic: (clock arithmetic): remainder after division

## Cryptography

- confidentiality: information only available to authorized entities
- integrity: information is modifiable only by authorized entities
- authentication: provides assurance about the identity
  - entity authentication
  - data origin authentication
- non-repudiation: the assurance that an entity cannot deny a previous commitment or action by providing unforgeable evidence
- accountability: the assurance that actions affecting security can be traced to the responsible party
- cryptographic primitives: basic building blocks of a security protocol system

Cryptography is mainly divided into two categories, namely symmetric and asymmetric cryptography.

## Symmetric cryptography

the key that is used to encrypt the data is the same for decrypting the data: shared key.

### symmetric chipers

- stream chipers: (RC4, A5). Apply encryption algorithms on a bit-by-bit basis to plain text using a key stream
  - synchronous: key stream depends only on the key
  - asynchronous: key stream also dependent on the encrypted data
    Encryption and decryption are basically the same function because they are simple module 2 additions or XOR operation.
    Key requirement: security and randomness of key streams.

- block chipers: (DES, AES). Break up a text to be encrypted (plain) into blocks of fixed length and apply encryption block by block. DES uses a design strategy known as Fiestel cipher. AES is built using SPN (substitution-permutation network).

Fiestel ciphers are based on the Fiestel network. This structure is based on the idea of combining multiple rounds of repeated operations to achieve desirable cryptographic properties knows as confusion and diffusion. Fiestel networks operate by dividing data into two blocks (left and right) and process these blocks via keyed round functions.
Ensures that even if a single bit is changed in the input text, it results in changing at least half (on average) of the bits in the cipher text.
Encryption and decryption operations are almost identical.

Modes of operation for block ciphers:

- **Block encryption mode**: plaintext divided into blocks of fixed length then encryption f is applied on each block
- **Keystream generation modes**: keystream that is then XORed with the plaintext
- **Message authentication modes**
- **Cryptographic hashes**
- **Electronic code book**: insecure
- **Cipher block chaining**: In this mode, each block of plain text is XORed with the previous encrypted block
- **Counter mode**

## Data Encryption Standard (DES)

Main use during 80s and 90s, broke in 1998 by EFF, uses a key of only 56 bits

## Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)

Standardized in 2001. So far, no attack has been found against AES that is better than the brute force method.

### AES steps

_Big Jump here_

## Financial markets and trading
