# Week 1

## Module 1: Software Product Management - The Discipline

### Introduction

#### Course Resources
[copy of the course notes](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c1-w1-introduction-to-SPM-V2.2.pdf)

##### Module 1: Software Product Management – The Discipline
- How does product management differ from project management?
“Project management” is a broad field that can be applied to any development scenario.
This specialization will describe practices specifically developed for creating
software products. One key challenge is change. 

- Better Software.
Goals are: the right product, done right, and managed right.

- Role of Software Product Manager: is in charge of the success of a software product. Speaks in client and dev languages. Team motivation. Effective communication.

- Structure of the SPM Specialization (Total 2 + 16 + 6 = 24 weeks or 20 weeks):
  - Introduction
  - 4 core courses (4 weeks each)
    - (1) Software Process and Agile Practices and (2) Client Needs and Software Requirements. (can run in parallel).
    - (3) Agile Planning for Software Products and (4) Reviews and Metrics for Software Improvement.
  - Capstone project (6 week course)

##### Module 2: Specialization Preview
- Defining Project Success: 
on-time, within budget, completed. Post success: bugs, support, rating, revenue, satisfaction.

- Agile:
Four core values define the Agile philosophy for software development.
  - Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
  - Working software over comprehensive documentation
  - Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
  - Responding to change over following a plan

- [Twelve Principles of Agile](http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html)
  1. Early and continuous delivery
  2. Working Prototype as Progress 
  3. Technical Excellence & Good Design 
  4. Focus on Simplicity
  5. Self Organizing Teams
  6. Encourage Face to Face Interaction
  7. Deliver Frequently
  8. Welcome Changing Requirements
  9. Sustainable Development
  10. Build Projects around Motivated People
  11. Daily Collaboration
  12. Reflect on Team Behaviour

- Topics in Software Product Management
  - Process:  
    Organizes the work of people into distinct high-level phases or stages logical order and providing clarity. G.e: Specification, Design and Implementation, Verification and Validation.      
    **Ad Hoc Development** occurs in the absence of a process structure and describes a development scenario where work is done reactively to inputs such as developer ideas, or client demands.

  - Requirements:  
    Defines the product to be built by specific descriptions. Get them right!. Make them clear: techniques to properly elicit and express requirements.

  - Planning:
    "Planning is bringing the future into the present so that you can do something about it now".
    planning is something that occurs constantly throughout the project.
    Planning includes:
      - Breaking down work into tasks
      - Estimating time for tasks: is related with requirement, the more specific req are, the clearer it is the estimation
      - Assigning work
      - Risk management: develop contingency plans to address risk.
      - Contingency plans

  - Monitoring:
    Helps to identify when things change and to keep on track. If the client asks for more features, a manager effectively monitoring the project can easily gauge whether their team has available resources, allowing them to adapt to changes within the project for a much higher likelihood of success. This moves you from being a reactive software product manager to a proactive software product manager.
    Provides transparency: everyone on the team knows the status of the project. Goal-driven and team-based mentality

[glossary of terms used](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c1-w1-introduction-to-SPM-Glossary-V2.0.pdf)

#### Course Map
PDF with each course content, tasks and durations.

[Course 1 - Introduction to Software Product Management.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c1-Introduction-to-Software-Product-Management-Course-Map.pdf)  
[Course 2 - Software Processes and Agile Practices.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c2-Software-Processes-and-Agile-Practices-Course-Map.pdf)
[Course 3 - Client Needs and Software Requirements.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c3-Client-Needs-and-Software-Requirements-Course-Map.pdf)  
[Course 4 - Agile Planning for Software Products.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c4-Agile-Planning-for-Software-Products-Course-Map.pdf)  
[Course 5 - Reviews and Metrics for Software Improvements.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c5-Reviews-and-Metrics-for-Software-Improvements-Course-Map.pdf)  
[Course 6 Capstone Project.graffle](moocs/specialization/software-product-management/resources/c6-Software-Product-Management-Capstone-Course-Map.pdf)  

### Lesson 1: Better Software

Normally, the development team is made up of coding muscle, graphic designers and testing personnel.

As a Software Product Manager, you'll be interacting with a lot of different people, including clients and development teams. You'll also be tasked with matching and tracking progress and development. It is also your duty to ensure the product works the way it's supposed to and validate that the product meets the needs of the client. However, as a product manager, you do not have to act as a messenger between the client and development team. You want to encourage them to communicate frequently.

Making better software. 
- The right product: This could mean a mix of many things. It meets their needs, it's easy to learn and easy to use. It doesn't waste their time and it looks nice. Basically, the clients are happy with it. If true, we say that software product is _validated_.
- Done right: the software conforms to a specific design. And in turn, the design satisfies the stated set of requirements. Developers can conduct reviews and tests to ensure that the requirements, design and implementation line up. Such activities try to catch defects earlier and improve quality. If true, we say, the software product is _verified_. 
- Managed right: it insures that the other view points are met. The idea is to set up just enough process and suitable practices to organize the work of everyone involved. Such activities ease communication and feedback, so that everyone is clear on the next steps.  If true, we say that the software project is _managed_. 

### Lesson 2: Why Software Product Management?
SPM ninja

### Lesson 3: The Role of Software Product Manager
You're in charge of the success of a software product. But the role is much more than just managing a project. The role involves really understanding the product.  
You're also going to have to know the business case, that is, the value that this project will have for the client, and the way the software will change the game for this client's business.  
Great software product managers have mastered multiple disciplines. They can speak to both clients and developers in their terms. They can listen and imagine a client's vision, communicate effectively with their development team members, and motivate the team to achieve the best outcomes.  
They can also manage clients' expectations, and they also know how to get the best efforts out of their development team. They care about their people.  
Success of your product also depends on solid teamwork. Programmers, testers, interface designers graphic artists, must work together. Your role is to empower them to bring their best efforts to your project.  
Software product management is a leadership role.

### Lesson 4: Specialization Overview

#### How to be a Better Learner
- First, we suggest that you use a method of learning that works for you. 
- Next, we suggest you ask questions. 
- Our third tip for you, is to submit your own work. 

#### Plagiarism
Plagiarism, as defined in Coursera's Honor Code, is when you copy words, ideas or any other materials from another source without giving credit. Plagiarism is unacceptable in any academic environment and is a serious violation of Coursera's Honor Code. 

#### Specialization Overview
The way we have designed this specialization is that each course builds upon knowledge gained in the last. So, we encourage you to start at the beginning and work your way through sequentially. However, our Software Processes & Agile Practices course, and our Client Needs & Software Requirements courses have been designed so that you may take them in whichever order you like. 

#### Supplementa Resources
[What, exactly, is a Product Manager? - MindTheProduct." 2013. 21 Jun. 2016](http://www.mindtheproduct.com/2011/10/what-exactly-is-a-product-manager)
“to discover a product that is valuable, usable and feasible”. Similarly, I’ve always defined product management as the intersection between business, technology and user experience (hint – only a product manager would define themselves in a venn diagram). A good product manager must be experienced in at least one, passionate about all three, and conversant with practitioners in all.
We’re the unsung heroes of the tech world – or at least we’d like to think so…

["Tony Fadell: The first secret of design is ... noticing | TED Talk | TED.com." 2015. 21 Jun. 2016](https://www.ted.com/talks/tony_fadell_the_first_secret_of_design_is_noticing)

["Linda Hill: How to manage for collective creativity | TED Talk | TED.com." 2015. 21 Jun. 2016](https://www.ted.com/talks/linda_hill_how_to_manage_for_collective_creativity)
