# Week 2

## Module 2: Foundations of Software Product Management

### Lesson 1: Project Success, Why Agile?

Agile practices are guidelines that suggest how software development should occur to get the best results. Success and Agile are directly related.

Software product management professionals will often use schedule, budget, and user requirements as benchmarks for defining success.  
Project success could also be measured by the number of post-release bugs, the support needed after a release, the product's customer rating, the revenue generated, or the client satisfaction.  
No matter how you decide to measure project success, Agile can help you achieve it. 
Timing is the most important factor for having a successful project.

Agile brings focus to ensure that your project develops at a steady, manageable, and efficient pace. This keeps programmers from getting overwhelmed with the project: happy and productive programmers. 

Agile practices also encourage:
- frequent and consistent testing. This helps to reduce bugs. 
- communication with the client. This gives transparency

The goal of your development team is to satisfy your client.

Software development is all about iterations and evolutions. Just because you succeed or fail one week does not guarantee that the next week will be the same. 

Agile practices will impact the entire development process. This ultimately creates better software, happier developers, and satisfied clients. 

#### Readings
* [There is No Common Definition of Software Development Success](http://scottambler.com/backup_muse/no-common-definition-of-success.html)

* [2013 IT Project Success Rates Survey Results](http://www.ambysoft.com/surveys/success2013.html)

### Lesson 2: Agile Manifesto
The Agile Manifesto was created when 17 software gurus gathered at a ski resort to come up with better ways to manage the process of producing great software.

They established four core value statements about what is most important in software development. To further expand on the core values, the Alliance also agreed on 12 supporting principles. 

- Individuals and interactions over processes and tools. 
- Working software over comprehensive documentation. 
- Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.
- Responding to change over following a plan.

They are suggesting that the first items are the more important things to focus on. 
What is important is that you implement the values that do work.

#### A Delivering Working Software

- Principle #1  
Our highest priotiry is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of **valuable** software.

- Principle #2  
Deliver working software frequently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a preferenceto the shorter timescale.

- Principle #3  
Working software is the primary measure of progress. Implies a sense of completeness: all the code has been written, tested and documented.

Ways to make software product more change friendly:
- Frequent client communication
- Neat, commented source code
- Continuously reviewing and improving your project
- Updated, prioritized list of features
- Development team is open to change

#### B Flexible Design and Adapting to Change

You need to plan your project in such a way that change is not detrimental. A good way to make your product more responsive to change is to have a flexible design and an adaptable process. 

- Principle #4  
Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer's competitive advantage.

- Principle #5  
Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility.

- Principle #6  
Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely

- Principle #7  
Simplicity, the art of maximizing the amount of work not done, is essential. Deliver what is essencial and reduce unnecessary work. This mean writing less code and documentation, and focusing on delivering a high-impact product that is as simple as it can be.

#### C Collaborative Communication and Organization
Teams can be organized to facilitate better communication and drive great software development.

- Principle #8  
Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and support they need, and trust them to get the job done. To act as more of facilitator for your team.

- Principle #9  
The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams. Assigning tasks and choosing tools to use.

- Principle #10  
Business people and developers must work together daily throughout the project. Product manager act as a facilitator, but never as a messenger between the two parties.

- Principle #11  
The most efficient and effective method for conveying information to and within a development team is face-to-face conversation.

- Principle #12
At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.


### Lesson 3: Why Process?
A process organizes the work of people into distinct phases or stages to develop a software product. 

Some phases of software development:
- Planning the project
- Writing the code
- Testing the software
- Maintaining the product

Although there are many different processes for organizing the work on a product through its lifetime, they generally share the high level notion of a phase. 
- specification: the idea for the product is conceived.
- design and implementation: figuring out the optimal way to structure the software which allows effective design and coding to begin.
- verification and validation: is where you test the software for bugs and ensure that the system is delivering what the client needs.

Processes are necessary to organize your development, and make sure that you are completing things in a logical order. They also ensure that steps are not missed or overlooked.

A well defined software process also lays out rules and responsibilities for everyone on the development team.

### Lesson 4: Why Requirements?
Requirements are a set of specific descriptions of your client's needs.  
Avoid confusion: properly elicit and express requirements, refine them.  
Clarify ideas.

### Lesson 5: Why Planning?
Planning involves using processes and requirements to start organizing tasks and schedules. Creating tasks and schedules requires identifying who should do the work, and estimating how long that work will take.  
Poorly written requirements make accurate time estimates difficult. The more specific the requirements are, the clearer it is to estimate how long the work will take to complete.  
Estimates and schedules are important part of good planning practices, having good estimates reduces project risk. Reducing risk and planning ahead is all a part of risk management. 

Risk management is the largest benefit of planning: "Planning is bringing the future into the present so that you can do something about it now."  

Examples of some risks that we can manage in the planning phase: 
1. Development of team responsibilities. You can create plans for what's needed to be done and who will complete it. This will reduce misunderstanding about who is responsible for what. Coordinated work efforts contribute to efficient development and help to establish a constant development pace. 
2. Software release bugs. Effective planning can build in enough testing time. This will reduce bugs in your released product and allow time for repair if a significant bug is found. 
3. Missing deadlines and/or budgets. Planning can keep development on track. Which reduces wasted resources. This reduces the risk of your project being late and/or over budget.

Planning can also help you to anticipate problems that may occur:
- What if a developer gets sick? 
- What if someone quits? 
- What if your client contact changes? 
- Or what if your technology crashes? 

Planning allows you to think of solutions to these problems so that you're prepared in the event that they do happen. Planning is something that occurs constantly throughout the project. 

### Lesson 6: Why Monitoring?
In order to ensure that you're on track, you must actively monitor, analyze, and review your progress. 

**Velocity** is just one of the ways in which we can monitor our progress. It is just one of the ways in which you can easily identify when something is going wrong and make the appropriate changes to address the problem.

You can also identify when something is going right within the project and celebrate the small victories. This won't only keep your project on track and improve its quality when delivered to the customer, it will also boost your team's morale and give them a high degree of transparency within the project. 

Transparency means that everyone on the team knows the status of the project and not just management. 

When the development team and the product manager work together to monitor their progress, with a positive, goal driven and team based mentality, monitoring your project can become a way to bring the team together. Nobody likes crunch time, and monitoring is a method which the team can use to help each other avoid late nights and long hours. 

If done well, monitoring can be a fantastic way to build a sense of common purpose and give your developers a sense of being part of a tightly knit team. 

Aspects of monitoring:
- Collaboration
- Visibility
- Verification
- Validation

#### Supplemental Resources

- ["Agile Succeeds Three Times More Often Than Waterfall." 2015. 21 Jun. 2016](https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/agile-succeeds-three-times-more-often-than-waterfall)

- ["Bill Gross: The single biggest reason why startups succeed | TED Talk ..." 2015. 21 Jun. 2016](https://www.ted.com/talks/bill_gross_the_single_biggest_reason_why_startups_succeed)

  Top 5 factors in success across more than 200 companies
  - 42% Timing
  - 32% Team/Execution
  - 28% Idea
  - 24% Business Model
  - 14% Funding

  So what I would say, in summary, is execution definitely matters a lot. The idea matters a lot. But timing might matter even more. And the best way to really assess timing is to really look at whether consumers are really ready for what you have to offer them. And to be really, really honest about it, not be in denial about any results that you see, because if you have something you love, you want to push it forward, but you have to be very, very honest about that factor on timing.

- [8th Annual State of Agile Survey - VersionOne." 2015. 21 Jun. 2016](https://www.versionone.com/pdf/2013-state-of-agile-survey.pdf)
  - Kanban
  - Agile Portfolio Management :
  [The Disciplined Agile (DA) Framework](http://www.disciplinedagiledelivery.com/agility-at-scale/portfolio-management/)
  - Tools https://www.versionone.com/

- [Agile Manifesto. 2003. 21 Jun. 2016](http://www.agilemanifesto.org/)

- [Importance of Processes and Standards in Software ... - CodeProject. 2012. 21 Jun. 2016 ](http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/17121/Importance-of-Processes-and-Standards-in-Software)
