# Module 1 - UML Architecture Diagrams

## Architecture Overview and Process

### [Software Architecture_Course Notes.pdf](moocs/specialization/software-design-architect/resources/c3-w1-software-architecture-notes.pdf)  

### [Glossary.pdf](moocs/specialization/software-design-architect/resources/c3-w1-glossary.pdf)  

### Architecture Overview and Process
Software architecture is the fundamental design of the entire software system. It defines what elements are included in the system, what function each element has, and how each element relates to one another.

Software architecture provides many advantages. One advantage is higher productivity for your software team. Software development becomes more effective because there is a defined structure in place for coordinating work, implementing individual features, or grounding discussions on potential issues. With a clear architecture, it is easier to know where key responsibilities of the system reside and where to make changes to address new requirements or fix failures. Additionally, a clear architecture will help to achieve quality in your software. With a well-designed structure using principles like separation of concerns, the system becomes easier to maintain, reuse and adapt. 

**Stakeholders** are the people who have an interest in the software system at hand. They are people who will either be using the system that you're creating or benefiting from it in some way: the software developers, the project managers, clients and end users. Each will have their own perspective. Helps to:
- developers: providing a strong direction and organization on what needs to be done.
- managers: gives useful information to identify possible risks and manage the project successfully: tasks dependencies, impacts of change and coordinate work assignments.
- clients: communicate coherently and confidently.

Software architecture is effectively expressed and communicated through models and diagrams. One important way that software architecture is presented is through UML diagrams.

> The architecture of a system is going to vary depending on what particular architectural model or style you have in mind: service perspective, data flow. So the architectural style dictates how you describe your architecture. 
Architectures are there to help being an agent of change. 

> As a software architect, you pretty much have to keep everybody's perspective in mind. You have to think about the perspective of your customer and what they want about your business and what it needs, about the engineering teams and how they expect to be able to work and what they need in order to be able to do a good job. Additionally, you have to then keep the perspective of this. You have to play the long game. You've got to think about the quality and the non-functional attributes of the system, so that those don't get forgotten and so be optimized in the short term. 

> The main thing that you have to keep in mind as an architect is always the question, am I doing something that's adding value to my client? Because if you're not adding value to your client, then you're not living up to one of your responsibilities which is to deliver them a product within their resources. 
One of the challenges you face as a software architect is keeping some sort of rain on technology enthusiasm. There's always some new way of doing something. There's always some new language. 
Good architects have a sense for when their design is simple enough to survive many changes over time or flexible enough to survive many changes over time. 
I don't think you can do agile without also being an experienced architect. 

## Communicating Architecture

### Kruchten's 4 + 1 Model View

- Logical View: focuses on the functionality of your system and the objects found within it (how the system implements the purpose your client desires. How close to their requirements your software is).  
UML: class diagram, state diagram
- Process View: nonfunctional requirements, presents the processes implemented by the objects in the logical view (how well it executes, efficiency of the system or the interaction of the subprocesses, performance and scalability).  
UML: sequence diagram
- Development View: implementation of your software: Programming language, libraries, toolsets. Besides code, this includes management details like scheduling, budgets and work assignments.    
UML:activity diagram
- Physical View: physical components that interact and need to be deployed (server, web client)  
UML: deployment diagram.

All of these four views have a purpose in common, the capabilities desired by the client. Without knowing what the system must achieve for its users, it would be difficult to detail these views. So we need the scenarios, the use cases or task required by the end users. Together, the logical, process, development and physical views along with the scenarios form Philippe Kruchten four plus one view model.

Not all software architectures need to be documented using the four plus one view model. If any of the views is thought to be useless they can be omitted. For example, if logical and development views are so similar that they might as well be the same, they can be described together. 

### UML Component Diagram

UML component diagrams are concerned with the components of a system. Components are defined as independent, encapsulated units within a system. Each component provides an interface for other components to interact with it. Component diagrams are used to visualize how a system's pieces interact and what relationships they have among them. What sets component diagrams apart from a lot of other diagrams is that they are about high-level structure and not about details like attributes and methods. They are purely about components and how they interact with one another. 
- ball connector: `-0` **provided interface**, show that a component offers an interface.
- socket connector: `-C` **required interface**, show that a component expects a certain interface provided by some other component.

An **assembly relationship** is where one component's provided interface matches another component's required interface.

Steps:
1. Identify the main objects
2. Identify all of the relevant libraries
3. Relationships found between these components

### UML Package Diagram

A package groups together elements of your software that are related. This elements can be related based on data, classes or user tasks, for example. Also defines a namespace. Package diagrams show packages and the dependencies between them.
Certain elements can be marked as `+` public (elements are accessible outside of the package) or `-` private. 
A package can: 
- `import` an element from another package.
- `import` the entire contents of other package
- be merged
- `access` the element from another package

A package diagram can be very useful in order to get a larger view of your system, particularly of namespaces and names and who knows whom.

### UML Deployment Diagram
In order for software to be ready to run, it is necessary to understand all the files and executables involved and the environments where they reside.  
There are two different types of deployment diagrams:
- specification level diagram gives an overview of artifacts and deployment targets, without referencing specific details like machine names. It focuses on a general overview of your deployment rather than the specifics. 
- instance level diagram is a much more specific approach, which can map a specific artifact to a specific deployment target. In particular, the instance level diagram can identify specific machines and hardware devices. Most commonly, this approach is used to highlight the differences in deployments among development, staging, and release builds.

### UML Activity Diagram
When you are creating an activity diagram, you will first need to identify the activities. These are the actions performed by the system. 
Elements:
- activities
- conditions

You can also map out concurrent activities that happen in parallel. One of the main ways concurrent activities are shown in an activity diagram is via partitions.
Swim lanes are used in an activity diagram to display these partitions.  
Activity diagrams allow you to map out the high level behavior of a system. They do not care about implementation or code, and merely focus on the control flow between actions. With these diagrams, you can pinpoint exactly what activities and conditions should be included, and get a better idea of the order in which features are encountered, while still taking into account, alternative flows for your system. 

## Assignments
- Draw a component diagram
based on user story
- Draw a deployment diagram