# Module 2: Architectural Styles

## Language-based systems

### Abstract Data Types and Object-Oriented
The programming paradigm of the language used to implement the system will affect the architectural style of that system. Each programming paradigm has its own set of constructs and their use will shape the system you create.
In this lesson, we will explore the object-oriented architectural style, which results from the object-oriented programming paradigm (Java, C++). 
Principles: 
- abstraction: you can simplify a concept by ignoring unimportant details.
- encapsulation: allows you to bundle data and functions into a self-contained object. So that other objects can interact with it through an exposed interface.
- decomposition: allows you to break up a whole problem into smaller, distinct parts.
- generalization: allows you to factor out conceptual commonalities.

Object-oriented design patterns fall into creational, structural, and behavioral categories. Creational patterns guide you in creating new objects. Structural patterns describe the relationships between objects and the interactions between classes and subclasses. And behavioral patterns focus on how objects perform work individually and how they can work as a group to accomplish something.
The object-oriented architectural style is focused on the data.

### Main Program and Subroutine
Now, we will discuss the main program and subroutine architectural style that follows from the procedural programming paradigm (C).
Your main consideration is the behavior of functions and how data moves through them. As a result, this approach is suitable for computation-focused systems.
In this lesson, we have seen how the main program and subroutine architectural style emerges from the procedural programming paradigm. This style promotes function modularity and function reuse, by insisting that programs are built up from smaller subroutines. Systems centered around computation can be ideal candidates for this architectural style.

## Repository-based systems
### Databases
A data centric software architecture will not only allow you to store and share data between multiple components, but it helps increase the maintainability, re-usability and scalability of the system. This can be achieved by integrating a method of shared data storage, such as a database into our overall system design.
At the core of a data centric architecture are two types of components. Central data is the component used to store and serve data across all components that connect to it, and data accessors are the components that connect to the central data component. 

The two key ones for a data centric architecture are data integrity, a database will ensure the data is accurate and consistent over its lifespan. This is important if you want to have reliable data, and data persistence. A database will make sure that data will continue to live on after a process has been terminated.




