# [Courses -> Intermediate -> Unit 2: Hidden talents](http://www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish/english/course/intermediate/unit-2)

> Present perfect continuous

## Sessions

### 1 - Just in Time
In, at, on with time expressions

**Time expressions with at**
- specific times - at one o’clock / at 2:30pm
- points of the day - at noon / at midday / at night / at midnight
- points of the day when things happen - at breakfast / at dinner / at lunchtime
- festivals and special days - at Easter, at Eid
- weekend - at the weekend

**Time expressions with on**
- specific dates - on 3rd May
- specific days - on Christmas Day / on New Year's Eve
- days of the week - on Monday / on Mondays

**Time expressions with in**
- parts of the day - in the morning / in the afternoon / in the evening
- seasons - in spring / in summer / in autumn / in winter
- years - in 1996

**Tips**
- on Saturday night.
- On Christmas morning.
- No preposition: 
  - in, at and on are not generally used before the words today, tomorrow and yesterday: I can't go tomorrow. He wrote that article yesterday
  - We don't use in, on or at in time expressions with the words this, that, next, last, all, one, each, some and every: I slept all day, He didn't come last night


### 2
Done
### 3 
Done 4/8
### 4
- they are a bit past it
- wannabe popstars
- judges also have pet hates and guilty pleasures
- The judges' listening capacity is not yet on a par with a human ear
- interest us with their personality, decisions and catchphrases
6/8
### 5

## Grammar: The present perfect continuous tense
### Meaning and use

We use the present perfect continuous to talk about an activity that started in the past and is continuing now or has recently finished.
- I’ve been reading that new book you lent me… I’m really enjoying it. (= action still in progress)
- Is that Joe? I’ve been trying to contact you. I’ve got some bad news. (= action recently finished)

We often use it to emphasise the continuous, ongoing nature of the activity or to say how long the activity has continued.
- She’s already been sleeping for two hours.
- It’s been raining all morning.
- I’ve been decorating the house this summer.

When we use the present perfect continuous for situations that have recently finished, we often use the adverb just.
- 'You’ve got paint all over your T-shirt.' 'Oh, I’ve just been painting the living room.'

We often use recently and lately with the present perfect continuous.
- I’m really tired. I haven’t been sleeping well lately.

### Form
The present perfect continuous is made with:
`subject + have/has/haven’t/hasn’t + been + present participle of main verb.`

We put just and already between have/has and the past participle. We usually put adverbs of time and duration after the main verb.

#### Positive
- Jack’s working very hard for his exams. He’s been revising all day.
- I’ve been working at the café for two weeks.
- You’ve been watching far too much telly for too long. Why don’t you take up a new sport?

#### Negative
- I haven’t been drinking coffee these last few days and my head is much clearer.
- Doctor, I’ve been feeling dizzy and faint in the mornings.

#### Question
Present perfect continuous questions are made with:
`have/has not + subject + present participle.`
- Have you been eating all the biscuits? There are none left!
- What have you been doing? You look exhausted!

### Take note: present perfect continuous and present perfect
Some verbs are almost never used in the present perfect continuous. We use the present perfect instead. The most familiar examples of these are be and know.
- WRONG: She’s been being here for ten minutes.
- CORRECT: She’s been here for 10 minutes.

- WRONG: I’ve only been knowing him since last week.
- CORRECT: I’ve only known him since last week.

### Take note: already
It is possible to put already at the end of a positive sentence or question.
- He has already been talking for ten minutes.
- Has he already been talking for ten minutes?
- He has been talking for ten minutes already.
- Has he been talking for ten minutes already?

### Pronunciation
In sentences with just and already, there is usually no stress on has/have or on just/already. The stress is on the subject and the present participle.
- The chicken has already been cooking for an hour and a half.
- I have just been thinking about Joe. Do you think he’s better now?

But we can put stress on just/already if we want to emphasise how recently or early something happened.
- The chicken must be ready by now. It’s already been cooking for an hour and a half.
- Oh, hi Joe. I’ve just been talking about you to Sophie!

## Vocabulary
### Session 1
Time expressions with at
  - at one o'clock / 2:30pm
  - at breakfast / dinner / lunchtime
  - at noon / midday / night
  - at the weekend

Time expressions with on
  - on 3rd May
  - on Christmas Day
  - on Saturday morning

Time expressions with in
  - in the morning / afternoon / evening
  - in spring / summer / autumn / winter
  - in 1996

### Session 3
- sensation: (here) something or someone that causes great excitement or interest
- auditions: short performances, usually by actors, musicians or dancers, to show that they are right for a particular play, film or show
- contestants: someone who takes part in a competition
- nippy (informal): cold
- warming up: preparing for a performance
- feedback: opinions or thoughts about something to say if it is good or liked, usually intended to improve it
- knock the judges socks off (idiom): really impress the judges

### Session 4
- past it: (informal) too old or out-of-date to be interesting or useful
- format: the way something (for example, a TV show) is arranged
- shake-up: a complete reorganisation
- hopefuls: people who are hoping to succeed
- panel: a small group of people who make a decision
- wannabe: short for 'want to be' (like someone or something else)
- temperamental: having a mood that can change quickly and unreasonably
- ear for (something): able to recognise, appreciate and produce sounds, especially music
- consistent: behaving in the same way over a period of time
- versatile: able to change easily
- programming language: the language that gives instructions to computers
- genres: types
- timbre: the quality of a musical sound
- pet hates: minor or small things or habits that a person finds particularly annoying, usually more than for other people
- guilty pleasures: things that a person likes, even though that they are not considered to be very good or fashionable
- on a par with (something): at the same level as (something)
- catchphrases: well-known sentences or phrases, usually associated with a particular famous person

### Session 5
- stains: dirty marks
- brandy: a strong alcoholic drink
- respected: admired
- squawk: (here) slang for 'complain'
- curse: (here) evil influence
- bare: (here) basic, with very little equipment
- trapped: unable to leave
- creep: move very carefully and secretly so that nobody sees you
