# [Courses -> Intermediate -> Unit 3: Can't buy me love](http://www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish/english/course/intermediate/unit-3)

> Quantifiers: all, each, every, both, either, neither

## Sessions
### 1 - Can you count it?
we can say a piece of information or two pieces of advice.  

So accommodation describes the groups of places that you can stay like flats, houses, students halls of residence. And group words are often uncountable, so there's no plural form. Fruit, food and weather are group words too. We don't usually say fruits, foods and weathers.

correct: it was beautiful weather on Saturday.  
incorrect: it was a beautiful weather on Saturday.

#### A piece of furniture, a glass of water
we can use *a piece of* with uncountable nouns like information, advice and research. We can also use *a piece of* with uncountable nouns for materials.
- Can I have a piece of paper, please?
- You need four pieces of wood to make this bookcase.

Words for containers: for containers of uncountable nouns we can use *a* or *an*
- Remember to pick up a bag of sugar from the shop.
- Would you like a glass of water? A large cup of tea, please.

### 2 - Quantifiers
#### a1 - All, each, every
All, every and each = the whole number of things in a group
**Every vs. each**
every emphasises the whole number in a group; each emphasises members of the group as individuals

#### a2 - Both, either, neither
- Both = this one AND the other one
- Neither = NOT this one AND NOT the other one
- Either = this one OR the other one

We use both (of), neither (of) and either (of) to talk about two people or things.
- Both of the men are wearing black ties.
- Both men are reading newspapers.
- Neither man is wearing a pink t-shirt.
- Neither of the men has blond hair.
- I don't think either man is going to get the job.
- She didn't choose either of them for the job.

#### a3 - Quantifiers
all, every, each, both, either and neither.
- have either this one or that one, each tablet is slightly different. Both tablets have similar specs. While neither tablet is heavy, make a difference every time you go out. Each of the tablets has 2 gigabytes of RAM. While neither of them seems much better than the other,

- after both, the verb is positive and plural – have. But after either and neither, the verb is positive and singular - is.
- each of the tablets and neither of them. You can use all, each, neither, either and both with of and a plural noun phrase – like the tablets – or with a pronoun – like them.

### 3 - Money, money, money
- holding a wodge of notes
- eating in fancy restaurants
- buying expensive luxury items
- They make do with what they have
- the children were content to play with things they found
- money might be central to our happiness
- the amount we earn in our jobs becomes crucial to our opinions
- When countries become wealthier
- longer life expectancy
- Things can't keep on getting better continuously
- money can make us decidedly unhappy
- you might need to quit the rat race

#### Vocabulary
- wodge: a large amount of something
- notes: banknotes
- fancy: (here) posh and expensive
- luxury items: things that aren't necessary but make our lives more comfortable and that are usually highly desired
- make do: manage in a situation even if you don't have a lot of resources or help
- content: happy
- be central to: be important to
- crucial: very important
- wealthier: richer
- child mortality: death rate of children between 1 month and 5 years of age
- life expectancy: the average time a person can may expect to live
- keep on: continue
- decidedly: absolutely
- rat race: the competitive and stressful world of work

### 4
#### a1 - Are we 'stuffocating'?
having too many things is very bad for us.

materialism and the consumer revolution… Best idea of the 20th Century: so all of the stuff we are into, buying lots of stuff gave people lots of great jobs and it transforms standards of living in the 20th Century. So it was a great idea: it solved the problem of scarcity but it's given us the problem of abundance.
"too much stuff will kill you"

- to many things
- to much stuff

##### Vocabulary
- suffocate: die because you can't breathe
- root around: look around (for something)
- materialism: belief that having money and things is important
- consumer revolution: big change in society where people buy and sell more things that are made in factories
- transforms: changes
- scarcity: not having enough
- abundance: having enough or too much
- signature pattern: recognisable pattern
- post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD): mental illness caused by stressful or frightening events
- chronic fatigue: illness where you feel tired all the time
- mortality: death
- correlation: connection
- grave: (here) death
- status: position in a group or society

#### a2 - Less is more...

### 5 - Jamaica Inn Part 3 - Strange goings-on
#### Vocabulary
- heather: a wild plant with small purple flowers that grows on hills and in wild places
- hanged: to be killed by having a rope put around the neck and then made to fall
- marsh: area of soft, wet land
- be damned: slang expression meaning you do not care about something at all
- bear: continue to accept something you do not like
- wagons: form of transport in the past with four wheels and pulled by horses
- smuggle: to secretly bring things in and out of a place in a way that is not allowed by law
- innocent: describes someone who has not done anything wrong

## Grammar -> Quantifiers: all, every, each, both, neither, either
### Meaning and use: all, every each
Quantifiers are words that give us information about the number or amount of something. All, every and each mean the whole number of something in a group, but there are differences in how we use them. In this unit we look at how to use them with nouns.

All or All the is followed by a plural or uncountable noun. Every and each are followed by a singular noun.
- All (the) students have their own rooms.
- All (the) information is on the website.
- Every/Each student has their own room. (OR has his/her own room.)

Every and each can often be used in the same place, but we prefer every when we are thinking about the whole number in a group, and each when we are thinking about the members of the group as individuals.
- I love every painting by that artist.
- Each painting is unique.

For emphasising every single one, we must use *every* not *each*.
- You’ve eaten every chocolate in the box!

For only two things, we can use each but not every.
- In baseball, how many players are there in each team?

**All** and **each** (but not **every**) can be followed by **of** and a **plural noun** or **pronoun**. Notice that each of with a plural noun or pronoun is followed by a singular verb.
- All of the students have their own rooms.
- Each of them has their own room.

### Form
#### With plural noun
- All (the) students
- All of the students
- Each of the students

#### With plural pronoun
- All of them
- Each of us

#### With uncountable noun
- All (the) information
- All of the information

#### With singular noun
- Every student
- Each student

### Take note:
#### articles
We don’t use an article (the, a/an) before *every* or *each*.
- Every painting is unique.
- NOT: The every painting is unique.

#### possessive and demonstrative adjectives
We don’t use *every* before possessive adjectives (his, her, etc) or demonstrative adjectives (these, those).
- Tarantino’s a brilliant director. I’ve seen all his films.
- NOT: I’ve seen every his films.

### Meaning and use of both, neither, either
We use both (of), neither (of) and either (of) to talk about two people or things. *Both* means this one AND the other. *Neither* means NOT this one AND NOT the other. *Either* means this one OR the other. *Either* is used mainly in questions and negative sentences. Here are some examples of how to use them with nouns:
- I like both pictures. / I like both of the pictures.
- Neither picture is right for the room. / Neither of the pictures is right for the room.
- She didn’t buy either picture in the end. / She didn’t buy either of the pictures in the end.

We often use *both… and*, *neither… nor*,and *either… or*.

- She plays both the violin and the guitar.
- Neither me nor my brother are married.
- Should I wear either this shirt or that one?

### Form
#### With plural noun
- both pictures
- both the/these pictures
- both of the/these pictures
- neither of the/these pictures
- either of the/these pictures

#### With plural pronoun
- both of them
- neither of them
- either of them

#### With singular noun
- neither picture
- either picture

### Take note: verbs
After *neither (of)* the verb is always positive. It can be singular or plural after neither of.
- Neither of these answers is/are correct.

But after *neither* + noun the verb is always singular.
- Neither answer is correct.

After *both (of)* the verb is always positive and plural. We don’t use both in negative structures.
- Both of these answers are wrong.
- NOT: Both of these answers are not correct.


## Vocabulary
### 6 Minute Vocabulary
Uncountable nouns have no plural form and are not used with the indefinite article **a** or **an**.
- Can you give me **some information** about **accommodation** in the city?

There are three main types of uncountable nouns that students often think are countable:
- activity nouns: travel, work, homework
- information nouns: advice, information, knowledge, research
- group nouns: accommodation, baggage, furniture, money, traffic, weather

Other nouns that are uncountable are:
- liquids and gasses: water, air
- materials and substances: wood, rice
- feelings and ideas: happiness, education
- subjects: geography, history, economics

A few uncountable nouns look plural because they end in -s. But they use a singular verb like other uncountable nouns:

**Physics is** a very interesting subject.

