# [Courses -> Intermediate -> Unit 4: Travellers' tales](http://www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish/english/course/intermediate/unit-4)

**Sessions**
- [1 - Short and sweet](#1---short-and-sweet)
- [2 - Multi-word verbs](#2---multi-word-verbs)
- [3 - An unusual honeymoon](#3---an-unusual-honeymoon)
- [4 - How to complain](#4---how-to-complain)
- 5 - Drama

## 1 - Short and sweet
Sometimes short is best, and in this session we look at spoken short forms. Why say give me when you can say gimme?

### a1 - Spoken short forms
Vocabulary
- gonna – going to: I’m gonna watch a DVD.
- wanna – want to : Do you wanna watch too?
- whatcha – what are you: Whatcha doing?
- dunno - don’t know: I dunno.
- gotta – got to (or: got a): I’ve gotta go now.
- hafta – have to: Do you hafta go already?
- gimme – give me: Gimme a call tomorrow.
- lemme – let me: Lemme know what you think.
- kinda – kind of: She’s kinda nice.

gonna is that we only use it to replace going to when it’s followed by a verb: I’m gonna go to Paris.

### a3 - Pronunciation practice

## 2 - Multi-word verbs
multi-word verbs, often known as **phrasal verbs**. 

### a1 - Introduction
Multi-word verbs with 'break'
in, up, out and down are prepositions, but here they behave more like adverbs. 
And some of them can be followed by a preposition, like with.
It's a huge topic. In fact, there are whole books just about phrasal verbs. 
We will learn them by topics

#### Vocabulary
- to break up: to end a relationship
- to break down: (of a car or vehicle) to stop working
- to break out: (here) to escape from prison
- to break in: to use force to enter a place
- to break off: 
  1) to separate something from something else 
  2) to end a relationship 
  3) to suddenly stop speaking

### a2 - Multi-word verbs on holiday
- `set off` (not set up)
- `to see us off` (not to see us out)
- `pick us up` (not see us off)
#### Vocabulary
- to check in: to arrive at a hotel and register your details; also to give your information at an airport before you fly
- to check out: to pay the bill and leave a hotel
- to pick (someone) up: to collect someone from a place
- to see (someone/something) off: to go to a place that someone is leaving from to say goodbye
- to take off: (of a plane) to leave the ground
- to touch down: (of a plane) after flying, to touch the ground again
- to set off: to begin a journey
- to get in: (of a plane or train) to arrive

### a3 - 6 Minute Grammar (Phrasals)
- get together
- keep up with
- let our friends down: don't help or support them
- putting off
- ring them up
- stand by
- keep up with people
- point out: to say something interesting
- meet up
- put off arrangements or put arrangements off

If the object is a pronoun, you have to put it in the middle: "ring them up", not "ring up them"

In some two-word verbs, the second word such as **by**, **with**, **into**, or **on** behaves like a preposition, not an adverb. And in these verbs, the object or object pronoun always comes after the preposition: stand by us

**keep up with**: keep in contact with: a verb: keep, plus an adverb: up, plus a preposition: with. And with phrasal verbs with three parts, the object always comes at the end. We keep up with people.

#### Session Grammar

Form of multi-word verbs
- No object: Are you **going away** on holiday this year?
- Noun object: I can’t wait to **look around Athens**.
- Object pronoun after the verb: I’m so **looking forward to it**!
- Object pronoun in the middle: Is someone **picking you up** at the airport?

Phrasal verbs with direct objects
The noun object can usually go before or after the adverb.
I **broke off** our engagement. OR I **broke** our engagement **off**.

But if we use a direct object pronoun, remember it can only go between the verb and the adverb.
WRONG: I broke off **it**.
RIGHT: I broke **it** off.

## 3 - An unusual honeymoon
### a2 - 'Jilted John' seeks honeymoon companion

**Vocabulary**
- set off: start a journey or trip
- dumped: (here) suddenly ended a relationship
- split up: end a relationship
- get (something) back: be given something you had before
- spare: extra
- give up (something): (here) stop hoping for (something)
- put (something) up: make (something) available
- auction: a public sale in which goods or property are sold to the highest bidder
- overwhelmed: very impressed
- looking up: going well
- jilted: rejected by a lover or partner
- pulled out: didn't complete something that was promised

### a3
**Vocabulary**
- blossom: (here) develop in a pleasing or promising way
- complete stranger: someone you have never met before and know nothing about
- thoroughly: very much
- not on the cards (idiom): not possible or likely

## 4 - How to complain
### a1 - There's a problem with my room...

**Vocabulary**
Tips for making complaints
1. Tell a story: Give some background before mentioning your complaint. But keep it short! *I've just checked into room 401. It's a lovely room, but the problem is that I was really desperate for a drink and the mini-bar's empty.*

2. Soften your tone: Use **seem to** and **appear to** to make your language softer. They're often used with **be**. In the negative, you need an auxiliary like **can't** or **don't**. 

The form is **seem to + infinitive + the problem**

*Sorry, there seems to be a problem with the radio.
Excuse me, there appears to be a problem with your ticket.
I can't seem to get the TV to work.
There don't appear to be any slippers in the room.*

### a2 - Slippers
## 5 - Drama
Jamaica Inn Part 4 - The horse thief

**Vocabulary**
- magistrate:  a person who decides in a law court if someone is guilty of a minor crime 
