# [Courses -> Intermediate -> Unit 5: The colleague from hell](http://www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish/english/course/intermediate/unit-5)

**Sessions**
- [1. Ordinal numbers](1.-ordinal-numbers)
- [2. Will your English improve if you study hard?](#2.-will-your-english-improve-if-you-study-hard?)
- [3. English at Work](#3.-english-at-work)
- [4. Working with the colleague from hell](#4.-working-with-the-colleague-from-hell)
- [5. Drama](#5.-drama)

## 1. Ordinal numbers

### a1
Try to say importants dates in english, so you will remember the vocabulary.

### a2
Pay attention to cardinals

### a3 - Marcus, the most disorganised man
Don't mix different forms in your essays or business communications. You should pick one form - and stick to it. Consistency is much more professional.

#### Vocabulary: Ordinals - meaning and use
Ordinal numbers tell us the position of something in a group. They are used for:
1. Dates: It's the twelfth of November
2. The order of events:  Her fiftieth birthday
3. Position in space: Our apartment's on the first floor. It's the third on the right
4. Order of quality: The first prize in the competition

**Spelling and form**
- We usually form ordinal numbers by adding `-th` to cardinal numbers: four - `fourth`
- `first`, `second` and `third` are irregular forms
- `fifth`, `eighth`, `ninth`, `twelfth` and numbers ending in `-y` (drop the -y and replace it with `ieth`) have irregular spellings: `twentieth`
- We say dates with `the` and `of`: the eighth of April. April the eighth 
- But we don't write them like that. We write them as: 8th April | April 8th | 8 April
- First, second and third have the irregular suffixes `1st`, `2nd` and `3rd`



## 2. Will your English improve if you study hard?

### Session Grammar
**Zero conditional**
Meaning and use: To talk about things which always happen if an action takes place.

Form: The `if/when` part is `present simple`. The `result` is also `present simple`.
- If you work on the computer too long, your eyes start to hurt.
- I get terrible headaches when I eat chocolate.
- I feel upset when he doesn't answer my calls.
- What comes out of a volcano when it erupts?

The two parts can come in any order:
- Your eyes start hurting if you work on the computer too long.
- When I eat chocolate, I get terrible headaches.

Use the zero conditional for facts, things that are generally true or that you believe to be true. You can use if or when and the meaning doesn't change.

- When it rains, the ground gets wet.
- If you drink a lot of fizzy drinks, your teeth get damaged.
- I get a stomachache if I eat too much cake.

**First conditional**
Meaning and use: To talk about things which might happen if an action takes place.

Form: The `if/when` part is `present simple`. The `result` part is `will + infinitive (without 'to')`.
- If you drop that glass, it will break.
- I'll go home when I finish work.
- I won't wait for you, if you're late again.
- Where will he live when he moves to the city? 

The two parts can come in any order:
- That glass will break if you drop it.
- When I finish work, I'll go home.

Use the first conditional for possible future results of an action or situation. Using if means that we are not sure about the possible result. Using when means we think the possible result is more likely.

- If you don't take an umbrella, you'll get wet.
- We'll be late if we don't leave soon!
- I'll tell you the good news when I see you.

### a2 - Zero or first?
We use 'if' for things which are could happen and 'when' for things which are more certain to happen.

### a3 - 6 Minute Grammar
If you drop that glass, it'll break.
If you drop the glass, it might break.

## 3. English at Work
### a1
### a2
### Session Grammar
How to ask someone to do something
1. It would be great if you could... + infinitive (without to)
   - clean your desk
   - do your work
   - try my idea
2. I'd really appreciate it if... + you could/would + infinitive (without to)
   - you could keep your desk tidy
   - you would not eat at your desk
   - you could be quiet
3. Would you mind... + verb+ing?
   - helping me
   - clearing up
   - answering the phone

How to ask someone to stop doing something
1. It would be great if you could stop... + verb+ing
   - eating at your desk
   - dropping food on the floor
   - talking so loudly
2. I'd really appreciate it if you would stop... + verb+ing
   - smoking in the toilets
   - using Facebook at work 
   - answering your phone in meetings

### Session Vocabulary
- hot desking: working at any available desk in the office
- a trial period: an amount of time to try out an idea
- to lead by example: to behave in a way that you would expect others to
- ground rules: the basic rules that everyone needs to follow
- unstuck: doesn't work/fails

## 4. Working with the colleague from hell

### a1
A 1998 study in the British Journal of Psychology also found that background noise containing irrelevant speech affected workers' ability to memorise prose and do mental arithmetic.
### a2

### Session Vocabulary
- open-plan offices: offices that have large rooms with few or no dividing walls to make smaller rooms

- downside: disadvantage
- disruptive: causing trouble so that others cannot continue what they are doing
- abused: treated badly
- draw: attraction that lots of people are interested in
- get away with: escape punishment for
- for the time being: now; at the moment
- gripes: complaints
- personal hygiene:  keeping your body clean
- etiquette: a set of rules that control behaviour in certain situations and by certain groups
- air your grievances: tell people about your complaints
- inane: stupid and boring
- irrelevant: not important
- maintain: keep
- dignity: state of keeping your respect
- influence: affect
- alternative: other option

## 5. Drama
### Session Vocabulary
- sacks: large strong bags which are used to store things
- disturb: to upset badly
- storm out: leave a room quickly and angrily
- rumour: information or a story that people talk about but that may not be true
- threaten: tell someone you will hurt them
- ponies (singular: pony): small horses
- drown: die under water because you can't breathe
- chills me to the bone: frightens me very much
