# [Courses -> Intermediate -> Unit 6: Jurassic mystery: unpacking the past](http://www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish/english/course/intermediate/unit-6)

> Modals of deduction and speculation - present and past

**Sessions**
- [1. Practise your prefixes](#1-practise-your-prefixes)
- [2. It must have been...](#2-it-must-have-been)
- [3. Three million-year-old technology](#3-three-million-year-old-technology)
- 4. How to pronounce couldn't've, wouldn't've, mightn't've
- 5. Drama: Jamaica Inn

## 1. Practise your prefixes
### a1. 6 Minute Vocabulary
Prefixes `de-`, `dys-`, and `dis`
- `dis`: means not, by adding `dis` we can turn a word into its opposite: disagree, disrespect, discomfort, disappear.
- `dys`: are usually medical, it also has a negative meaning – it has the idea of being bad or abnormal: dyslexia, dysfunctional
- `de`: take away or remove something: detox

### a2. What does that mean?
exercise
### a.3 Prefix revision
- re: again
- pre: before, already
- pro: in support of, in favour of (often followed by a hyphen)
- un: not
- in: not
- mis: wrong, or not

### Session Vocabulary

- detox: removing harmful substances from your body by eating particular foods
- disagree: not to agree
- disappear: to no longer be seen
- discomfort: feeling of not being comfortable or in slight pain
- disrespect: rudeness, behaviour that is upsetting or insulting
- dysfunctional: not working or behaving normally
- dyslexia: condition that makes reading and spelling difficult
- dyspepsia: medical condition that means the body does not digest food properly, causing pain and discomfort

## 2. It must have been...
### a.1 - Life on Mars
In this session we're looking at modals. They are words like can, could, may, might and must. We use them in lots of different ways.

We often use modals we're not sure about something. For example, when we think something is possible or true, but we don't have all the information.

### a.2 Modal murder?

### a.3 6 Minute Grammar
Now modal verbs are used in a lot of different ways but in this programme we’re looking at the modal verbs we use when we're talking about things we think are possible or true – both in the present and in the past.

### Session Grammar
**Modals - meaning and use**
`Might`, `may` and `could` – possible in the present or past
  There `might` / `may` / `could be` life forms on Mars
  NASA says it `may` / `might` / `could have been` suitable for life in the past

Might not (mightn’t) and may not - negative possibility in the present or past
  Their information might not/may not be correct
  They mightn’t have got correct data

Couldn’t – completely impossible
  Other scientists say that there couldn’t be life on Mars
  The gas couldn’t be coming from living organisms

Must and can't – strong beliefs
  Oh, it can’t be true! (I believe strongly that it isn’t true)
  There must be another explanation (I believe there’s another explanation)
  They must have made a mistake! (I believe they have made a mistake)

### Session Vocabulary
- methane: clear gas with no smell, used as fuel

## 3. Three million-year-old technology
Were early humans more intelligent than we thought?

### Session Vocabulary
- spotted: saw after looking hard
- dating: finding out the age o
- monumental: (here) very large amount of time
- game-changing: having a big effect

## Grammar
**Present positive**
The present positive is might / may / could / must + the infinitive of the verb be or another verb. Or the continuous be + verb-ing.
  The information `might be` correct.
  They `must know` that it isn’t possible.
  Bacteria-like organisms `could be producing` the gas.

**Present negative**
The present negative is might not / mightn’t / may not / can’t / couldn’t + the infinitive of the verb be or another verb. Or the continuous be + verb-ing.
  Their information `may not be` correct.
  They `can’t have got` the correct data.
  The gas `couldn’t be coming` from living organisms.

**Past positive**
The past positive is might / may / could / must + have + been or the past participle of another verb. Or the continuous been + verb-ing.
  There `must have been` water on Mars in the past.
  Something `might have existed` there.
  Who knows what `could have been living` in that lake?

**Past negative**
The past negative is might not / mightn’t / may not / can’t / couldn’t + have + been or the past participle of another verb. Or the continuous been + verb-ing.
  There `may not have been` anything in the lake.
  Scientists `can’t have found` anything definite.
  They `mightn’t have been looking` in the right area.
