# Week 1 - Social Choice

Content:  
[An Introduction to the Course](#an-introduction-to-the-course)  
[Syllabus](#syllabus)  
[1.1 Social Choice: Taste](#1.1-social-choice:-taste)  
[1.2 Social Choice: Voting Scheme](#1.2-social-choice:-voting-scheme)  
[1.3 Paradoxical Outcomes](#1.3-paradoxical-outcomes)  
[1.4 Impossibility of Non-Paradoxical Social Welfare Functions](#1.4-impossibility-of-non-paradoxical-social-welfare-functions)  
[1.5 Arrow's Theorem](#1.5-arrow's-theorem)

## An Introduction to the Course

Co-teachers:

* Kevin. I am an Associate Professor of Computer Science at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada. My research is on artificial intelligence, game theory, electronic commerce, and algorithms.

* Matt Jackson, I am a professor of economics at Stanford University and I do research on game theory, and social networks, and a variety of micro-economic topics.

* Yoav Shoham, I am also a professor here at Stanford. Like Kevin I am also a computer scientist in artificial intelligence and electronic commerce and game theory.

Game theory is about all kind of strategic interactions among self interested agents Including those frivolous ones, but also much more serious ones.

Game theory has become a really essential tool to understanding a lot of different interactions, anything from auctions, to people's behavior in financial markets. To even international conflict to understanding political interactions. So it's become an essential part of any social scientists' toolbox and indeed it's actually used even beyond that so things like biology, predator prey games, a whole series of things.
It's really a fairly widely applicable thing in any situation where there's competition, strategic interaction.

Our intention is just to show people how our game is structured, how do we think about strategic interaction between people will start with equilibrium notions.

## Syllabus

[Game Theory II: Advanced Applications by Matthew O. Jackson, Kevin Leyton-Brown, Yoav Shoham](http://web.stanford.edu/~jacksonm/GTOC-II-Syllabus.html)

Suggested Readings (free resources)

* Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations, by Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown.
* Mechanism Theory, by Matthew O. Jackson.
* Matching, Auctions, and Market Design, by Matthew O. Jackson
* A Brief Introduction to the Basics of Game Theory, by Matthew O. Jackson.
* A Crash Course in Implementation Theory, by Matthew O. Jackson.

## 1.1 Social Choice: Taste

If I know that agents are going to behave game theoretically, how can I design interactions for them that lead to good social outcomes?

The first topic we're going to think about is called social choice. And here leaving aside the question of strategic behavior, we ask about how to aggregate different people's preferences together in a sensible way.

So social choice is essentially the problem of voting.

## 1.2 Social Choice: Voting Scheme

### Introduction

Our setting now:

* a set of **outcomes** or **alternatives**
* agents(voters) have a **preferences** over them
* the goal: a **social choice function**: a mapping from profiles of preferences to a particular outcome
* Which such functions have desirable properties?

### Preferences

* Given is a finite set of **outcomes** or **alternatives** `O`.
* agents have (strict) **preferences**, `P`, over the outcomes: linear orders (or total orders).
* Linear orders `L`: binary relations `P` that are total and transitive
  * total: for every pair of outcomes a!=b either a`P`b or b`P`a (but not both: so it is complete and antisymmetric)
  * transitive: a`P`b and b`P`c implies a`P`c
* Non-strict preferences `Lns`: binary relations `p` (weak preference) that are complete and transitive:
  * complete: for every a,b either a`p`b or b`p`a (both indicates indifference)
  * transitive: a`p`b and b`p`c implies a`p`c

### Formal model

Given is a set of agents N={1,2,..,n}, a finite set of outcomes (alternatives, candidates) `O`, and the linear orders on the outcomes, `Lns`

**Social choice function C** `C`: `Lns`^n -> `O` (weak preferences into outcomes)

**Social welfare ordering W** `W`: `Lns`^n -> `Lns` (weak preferences into ranking of outcomes)

### Voting Schemes: Scoring Rules

* **Plurality**: pick the outcome which is most-preferred by the most people
* **Cumulative voting**: distribute 5 votes each, possible to vote for the same outcome multiple times
* **Approval voting**: vote for as many outcomes as you "like"

### voting Schemes base on Ranking

* **Plurality with elimination** (instant runoff, transferable voting)
  * if some outcome has a majority, it is the winner
  * otherwise, the outcome with fewest votes is eliminated (tie-breaking procedure)
  * repeat until there is a winner

* **Borda rule, Borda Count**
  * assign each outcome a number.
  * the most preferred outcome gets a score of n-1, the next most preferred gets n-2, down to 0.
  * Sum scores for each outcome. and choose one with highest score

* **Successive elimination**
  * in advance, decide an ordering alternatives
  * everyone votes for the first or second, and the loser is eliminated
  * then vote for winner vs third alternative, and lower is eliminated
  * continues until the last alternative considerer

### Condorcet Consistency

If there is a candidate or outcome that is preferred to every other cadidate in pairwise majority-rule comparisions, that candidate should be chosen

* There is not always a condorcet winner
* sometimes, there is a cycle where A defeats B, B defeast C, and C defeast A, known as a condorcet cycle

## 1.3 Paradoxical Outcomes

Even very reasonable sounding voting schemes can run into problems.

### Condorcet example

  499 agents: A `P` B `P` C  
    3 agents: B `P` C `P` A  
  498 agents: C `P` B `P` A  

* What is the Condorcet winner? B
  Because of relative preference: We have here that 501 of the agents prefer B to A. And 502 of the agents prefer B to C. So clearly, B is the Condorcet winner.
* What would win under plurality voting? A  
  499 agents would vote for A. And the next highest number would be C with 498
* What would win under plurality with elimination? C  
  B would leave the competition, and now it will be head to head between C and A and in this case C would be the winner because 501 out of the 1000 agents prefer C to A.

### Sensitivity to Losing Candidate

  35 agents: A `P` C `P` B  
  33 agents: B `P` A `P` C  
  32 agents: C `P` B `P` A  

* What candidate wins under plurality voting? A
  A would get 35 votes and the second highest would be B with 33.
* What candidate wins under Borda voting? A
* Now consider dropping C. Now what happens under both Borda an plurality? B wins.
  And so, should you have a candidate that has no chance of winning and his sole role, if you wish, is to change what otherwise would be the outcome of the elections.

### Sensitivity to Agenda Setter

  35 agents: A `P` C `P` B  
  33 agents: B `P` A `P` C  
  32 agents: C `P` B `P` A  

* Who wins pairwise elimination, with the ordering A, B, C? C
  !!!NOT CLEAR - CHECK!!!
* Who wins with the ordering A, C, B? B
* Who wins with the ordering B, C, A? A

### Another Pairwise Elimination Problem

  1 agent:  B `P` D `P` C `P` A  
  1 agent:  A `P` B `P` D `P` C  
  1 agent:  C `P` A `P` B `P` D  

* Who wins under pairwise elimination with the ordering A, B, C, D? D.
* What is the problem with this?
  * All of the agents prefer B to D, the selected candidate is Pareto-dominated!

The goal was to alert us to the fact that a lot of reasonable sounding voting schemes can be problematic.

## 1.4 Impossibility of Non-Paradoxical Social Welfare Functions

A social welfare function is a voting rule where every agent tells me a set of preferences. So it gives me a total ordering over all of the choices that we have to make, over all of the candidates. And getting this whole set of different rankings for all the different agents, the social welfare function gives me back a single ranking which is the social choice.

Definitions for Social Welfare Functions (`W`):

**Pareto Efficiency (PE)**: `W` is `PE` if whenever all agents agree on the ordering of two outcomes, the social welfare function selects that ordering.

**independent of irrelevant alternatives (IIA)**: `W` is `IIA` if the selected ordering between two outcomes depends only on the relative orderings they are given by the agents.

**Dictatorship**: `W` is a `dictatorship` if there exists a single agent whose preferences always determine the social ordering.

Theorem:

**Arrow** Any social welfare function `W` over three or more outcomes that is Pareto efficient and independent of irrelevant alternatives is dictatorial. If `W` is `PE` and `IIA` => `W` is `dictatorial`

## 1.5 Arrow's Theorem